--- Page 1 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION
OSCARSTIFFELMAN
NANDCAPITAL
ozzie@cs.stanford.edu
imagine@gmail.com
Abstract. In 1956 John Kelly wrote a paper at Bell Labs describing the
relationship between gambling and Information Theory. What came to be
known as the Kelly Criterion is both an objective and a closed-form solution
to sizing wagers when odds and edge are known. Samuelson argued it was
arbitraryandsubjective,andsuccessfullykeptitoutofmainstreameconomics.
Luckily it lived on in computer science, mostly because of Tom Cover’s work
at Stanford. He showed that it is the uniquely optimal way to invest: it
maximizes long-term wealth, minimizes the risk of ruin, and is competitively
optimalinagame-theoreticsense,evenovertheshortterm.
One of Cover’s most surprising contributions to portfolio theory was the
universalportfolio. Relatedtouniversalcompressionininformationtheory,it
performs asymptotically as well as the best constant-rebalanced portfolio in
hindsight. IborrowatrickfromthatalgorithmtoshowthatKelly’sobjective,
even in the general form, factors the investing problem into three terms: a
moneyterm,anentropyterm,andadivergenceterm. Theonlywaytomaxi-
mizegrowthistominimizedivergencewhichmeasuresthedifferencebetween
ourdistributionandthetruedistributioninbits. Investingis,fundamentally,
acompressionproblem.
This decomposition also yields new practical results. Because the money
and entropy terms are constant across strategies in a given backtest, the dif-
ferenceinloggrowthbetweentwostrategiesmeasurestheirrelativedivergence
in bits. I also introduce a winner fraction heuristic which allocates capital in
proportion to each asset’s probability of dominating the candidate set. The
growth shortfall of this heuristic relative to the optimal portfolio is bounded
bytheentropyofthewinnerfractiondistribution. Tomyknowledge,boththe
heuristicandtheentropyboundareoriginalcontributions.
1. Introduction
In 1956 John Kelly wrote a paper while working at Bell Labs [9] describing
the relationship between gambling and Information Theory. The paper describes
what would eventually be known as the Kelly criterion. The term Kelly criterion
has come to signify two distinct things: the objective or utility function, as well
as the closed-form solution to the problem when a gambler’s odds and edge are
known. Kelly observed that simply maximizing expected wealth would surely lead
to ruin given enough time. What was needed was some kind of nonlinear utility
function to balance risk and reward. The math of utility functions came from Von
Neumann and Morgenstern’s game theory. It formalizes a subjective preference or
willingness to risk loss in pursuit of gain. Kelly wanted to avoid the “introduc-
tion of an arbitrary cost function,” likening it to the external value that people
1
6202
rpA
51
]EC.sc[
3v85701.4062:viXra

--- Page 2 ---
2 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
attemptedtoattachtoShannon’sinformation. Kellyrealizedthatmaximizinglog-
arithmic growth rather than simple expectation simultaneously avoids ruin while
maximizing asymptotic wealth. Kelly wasn’t the first to propose this objective. It
wasoriginallyproposedbyBernoulliin1738asthesolutiontotheSaintPetersburg
paradox[4]. ButKellywasthefirsttoconnectittothenewfieldofinformationthe-
ory, encouraged by Shannon himself who assisted with the paper and immediately
realized the significance.
It wasn’t clear at the time what was so special about this particular function.
It looks a little bit like Shannon’s celebrated entropy equation, but with money
replacing the term inside the logarithm. The function balances potential gains
and losses along with their probabilities through the curvature of the log function.
Becauselogissteepertotheleftthantotherightateverypoint,lossesmattermore
than gains. And log of zero is negative infinity, so it’s not enough to have a small
probability of blowup (ruin) – it has to be strictly zero. Another interpretation is
that investments should be both structurally and statistically asymmetric.
Shannon shared the paper with Edward Thorp, who applied it first to blackjack
[18],thentothestockmarketthroughPrinceton-NewportPartners,buildingoneof
the earliest quantitative investment funds and achieving one of the most successful
track records in investing history [19]. Thorp also conducted extensive mathemati-
cal analysis of the Kelly criterion, extending it to practical multi-asset and options
settings. [11]
Shannon separately presented these ideas to the economist Paul Samuelson at
MIT. Over the course of several evening meetings [6], they discussed and debated
the merits of this proposal. Samuelson is said to have had a “visceral dislike of
log utility.” He argued it was an arbitrary and subjective utility function, and
an unnecessarily conservative one at that. Over the course of several papers, he
defended economics against this incursion by computer science and “fallacy that
has been borrowed into portfolio theory from information theory of the Shannon
type.”[14, 13, 15] As perhaps the most influential economist at the time, he suc-
cessfully kept this idea out of mainstream economics.
Thankfully, this idea lived on in computer science, most notably because of the
work of Tom Cover, the Stanford information theory professor. We now know
because of Cover’s work that Shannon’s idea was not a subjective, arbitrary utility
function as Samuelson had argued. It is the objectively optimal way to invest for
three reasons.
(1) It maximizes long term wealth.
(2) It minimizes the risk of ruin.
(3) In a game-theoretic sense, it is competitively optimal, even over the short
term. Not just asymptotically as Samuelson believed. [2, 3, 1]
Samuelson seems to have understood the first two points, but he remained un-
convinced, believing there was nothing special about log that distinguished it from
other utility functions. The third reason, the most important, wasn’t known until
much later because of Cover’s work at Stanford. Proving optimality required new
ideas and techniques in information theory, including a version of the Asymptotic
Equipartition Property (AEP) for markets to show that it dominates every other
strategy over the long run [1], and an application of Kuhn-Tucker conditions [3] to
show that it is also optimal in a game-theoretic sense over the short term. Cover
noted that it was “tantalizing that [the log optimal strategy] arises as the solution

--- Page 3 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 3
tosuchdissimilarproblems”andwonderedifitwasjustamathematicalcoincidence
or something more fundamental. [2]. As Cover observed:
“there is no essential conflict between good short-term and long-
runperformance. Bothareachievedbymaximizingtheconditional
expected log return.” Cover [3]
One of Cover’s most surprising contributions to portfolio theory was something
calledauniversalportfolio. Relatedtouniversalcompressionininformationtheory,
it performs asymptotically as well as the best possible adversary. One that knows
the rules but not the future. Although the math is elegant, the argument is very
abstract. But one of the steps that Cover used in creating universal portfolios is
extremelyusefulbeyondthatalgorithm. Itrevealstheinformationstructureofthe
investing problem, making it accessible to the techniques of information theory.
Thatsametechniquewillbeappliedheretoshowthatwhatissopowerfulabout
the Kelly criterion is that even in the most general form, it factors the investing
problem into three terms: a money term, an entropy term, and a divergence term.
The first two terms don’t actually depend on our allocation or distribution. So the
only way to maximize our compounding growth rate is to minimize the divergence
which is a non-negative drag or friction and which only goes to zero when our dis-
tributionmatchestheunknowntruedistribution. Thismeansthat, fundamentally,
investing is a compression problem.
2. Classic Kelly
The classic Kelly criterion tells us how much to wager on a game of chance with
known odds and predictive edge. Assume that with probability p we win and our
wagerismultipliedbyreturnr. Andwithprobability(1−p)welosethefullwager.
The question is what fraction f to wager to maximize wealth. Note that r is the
return multiplier, not the more common odds=r−1.
If we start with initial wealth V , then with probability p we will win and our
0
wealth at the next step will be
(1) V =V (fr+(1−f))
1 0
and with probability (1−p) we will lose and our wealth will be
(2) V =V (1−f)
1 0
After n steps, our wealth becomes
(3) V =V (1−f)n0(fr+(1−f))n1
n 0
if we have n losses and n wins.
0 1
Kelly’s proposal is that we maximize the expected log wealth, or the probability
weighted average log return. Note that log is monotonic, so maximizing log return
also maximizes total growth after n steps. Kelly’s focus was the expected log-
growth per step, g. Since each step is multiplicative, the log of the full product is
the sum of the logs, and the average converges to the expectation in the limit.
(cid:16) (cid:17)
log Vn
(4) g(f)= lim
V0
=plog(fr+(1−f))+(1−p)log(1−f)
n→∞ n
Wecanfindthef∗ thatmaximizesgbytakingthederivativeandsettingitequal
to zero

--- Page 4 ---
4 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
dg p(r−1) 1−p
(5) = − =0
df fr−f +1 1−f
Solving for f we get
pr−1
(6) f∗ =
r−1
Thisisthefamous“edge/odds”Kellysolutionthatmaximizesgrowth. Plugging
it back into the growth equation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(1−p)r
(7) g∗ =plog(pr)+(1−p)log
r−1
If the market maker’s probability is q and the odds are fair, then q·r = 1, and
r = 1. Substituting into the equation:
q
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p 1−p
(8) g∗ =plog +(1−p)log
q 1−q
ThisistheKLdivergenceD (P∥Q)betweenourdistributionpandthemarket’s
KL
distribution q.
3. Horse Race Market
Consider a market where you can bet fractionally on mutually exclusive events
andyoumustfullyallocateyourcapital. Thisisdescribedasa“horseracemarket”
[7] with only one winner each time. In this case we need a weight vector W rather
than a single wager fraction f. If there are n horses, let w be the fraction wagered
i
on the ith horse, let p be the probability of the ith horse winning, and let r be
i i
the return or the wealth ratio for capital wagered on that horse. Kelly’s expected
log return for this game becomes:
N
(cid:88)
(9) g(W)= p log(r w )
i i i
i=1
In the classic Kelly example, we used calculus to find the optimal solution and
observed the information theoretic KL divergence in the solution. This time we
will take a more direct information theoretic approach to find and characterize the
solution. This problem is simple to analyze because there is only one nonzero term
inside the logarithm (the single winning horse).
Because the log of a product is the sum of logs, we can rewrite this as

--- Page 5 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 5
N
(cid:88)
(10) g(W)= p log(r w )
i i i
i=1
N N
(cid:88) (cid:88)
(11) = p log(r )+ p log(w )
i i i i
i=1 i=1
N N (cid:18) (cid:19)
(12) = (cid:88) p log(r )+ (cid:88) p log p i w i
i i i p
i
i=1 i=1
N N N (cid:18) (cid:19)
(13) = (cid:88) p log(r )+ (cid:88) p log(p )+ (cid:88) p log w i
i i i i i p
i
i=1 i=1 i=1
N N (cid:18) (cid:19) N (cid:18) (cid:19)
(14) = (cid:88) p log(r )− (cid:88) p log 1 − (cid:88) p log p i
i i i p i w
i i
i=1 i=1 i=1
N
(cid:88)
(15) = p log(r )−H(P)−D (P∥W)
i i KL
i=1
Notice that the first two terms don’t depend on W. The only way to maximize
growth is to minimize the third term which is the KL divergence between the
probability distribution and the weight vector. Because the weight vector sums
to one, we can think of it like a probability distribution. We know from Gibbs’
Inequality that D (P∥W) is non-negative and only goes to zero when P = W.
KL
In other words, the optimal strategy is to bet in proportion to the true probability
distribution. This is a counterintuitive fact because it does not depend on the
return distribution, just the probability of winning.
If the payoffs are priced fairly using a market probability Q, then as before
q ·r =1 and so q = 1.
i i i ri
Substituting that back into the above solution, we have
N (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) 1
(16) g(W)= p log −H(P)−D (P∥W)
i q KL
i
i=1
(17) =H(P,Q)−H(P)−D (P∥W)
KL
(18) =D (P∥Q)−D (P∥W)
KL KL
Which follows from the fact that KL divergence is the difference between the
cross entropy and entropy.
The growth rate is the difference between these two KL divergences: the diver-
genceofthemarketfromthetruedistributionminusthedivergenceofourallocation
from the truth. The intuition is that you can’t make money if the market is priced
accurately or if you simply agree with the market. You have to disagree with the
market while being closer to the true distribution.
4. General Case
TheHorseRaceMarketentailsmutuallyexclusiveevents,withonlyonenonzero
term inside the logarithm at each step. This makes it straightforward to analyze
usingstandardmathematicaltechniques. Considernowthemoregeneralcasewhere

--- Page 6 ---
6 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
there can be more than one nonzero term at each point in time. In this case, the
returnateachpointintimeistheinnerproductbetweentheweightvectorandthe
return vector:
N
(cid:88)
(19) r w
i i
i=1
and the log return is given by
(cid:32) N (cid:33)
(cid:88)
(20) log r w
i i
i=1
The Horse Race Market expected log return
N
(cid:88)
(21) p log(r w )
i i i
i=1
isaspecialcaseofthismoregeneralformulationinwhichtheithtermisnonzero
with probability p . The general case is more difficult to analyze because the sum
i
doesn’t have the same clean factorization.
To analyze this problem, I’m going to use a technique that was first used by
Tom Cover in his universal portfolio theory [5, 7] proofs. Although Cover used the
technique for a different purpose, it turns out to be extremely useful for analyz-
ing the general investing problem. It’s essentially a change of representation that
revealsaninformationstructuretotheinvestingproblemandmakesitmoreacces-
sible to techniques and insights from information theory. Cover used this trick to
makeitpossibletoapplythemathofuniversalcompressionwhichisthesurprising
idea from information theory that you can achieve the Shannon compression limit
asymptotically even without knowing the probability distribution ahead of time.
In the context of investing, this seems especially paradoxical, but the math is nev-
ertheless sound and elegant. Rather than using it to design an algorithm as Cover
did, I’m simply borrowing the technique for the purpose of analysis.
We traditionally think of the multi-period investing problem as a product of
scalars. We can write the return after n periods of some multi-period investment
process as the product of the individual returns:
n
(cid:89)
(22) R = r
n t
t=1
where R indicates the total growth of the multiplicative process after n steps.
n
Assuming we are compounding and rebalancing a fixed weight portfolio at each
pointintime,wecanwritethisfullprocess,wherew istheportfolioweightassigned
i
to the ith asset, and r is the return of the ith asset at time t.
i,t
n m
(cid:89)(cid:88)
(23) R = w r
n i i,t
t=1i=1
Notethattheproductofscalarsisnowseenasaproductofsums(dotproducts).

--- Page 7 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 7
Cover’sbrilliantinsightwasthatwecanrewritetheproductofsumsasasumof
products. Thismightseemlikeatriviallyalgebraicchange. Butaswillbecomeclear
momentarily, instead of compounding weighted returns per period, we can think of
this as a weighted average of an exponential number of multi-period returns.
Assume for now that there are only two assets in the system {a,b}. The return
after one period is
(24) w r +w r
a a,1 b b,1
After two periods the return is
(25) (w r +w r )(w r +w r )
a a,1 b b,1 a a,2 b b,2
Which we can expand as
(26) w2r r +w2r r +w w r r +w w r r
a a,1 a,2 b b,1 b,2 a b a,1 b,2 b a b,1 a,2
We have changed the product of sums into a sum of products. The number
of terms grows exponentially with the number of periods. With every additional
period, we double the number of terms in the two asset case.
Thesymbols{a,b}canbecombinedinto2n sequencesoflengthn. Eachsuchse-
quencecorrespondstoatermintheexpandednperiodsumofproducts,indicating
whether the return at time t should be a’s or b’s return at that time.
If n and n indicate the number times each symbol occurs in a given sequence,
a b
the weight for the sequence is
(27) wnawnb
a b
The returns are more complex because they change over time. For now, think
of them as an additional product that goes with each term.
What we now have is an exponential number of sequences that describe horse
race style (mutually exclusive) investments on only one symbol per period. It’s
straightforward to show that the weights wnawnb across these sequences add up
a b
to one. Effectively we have turned the multi-period compounding and rebalancing
process into a single (non-rebalancing) weighted investment across an exponential
numberofmulti-periodinvestments. Imaginepre-allocatingcapitaltoanexponen-
tial number of processes and compounding serially within each siloed process.
Let T (P) be the set of sequences of length n with empirical frequencies given
n
by
(28) P ={p ,...,p }
1 m
m
(cid:88)
(29) p =1
i
i=1
(30) np ∈N
i
Each T (P) defines a type class of sequences. It is the set of all permutations of
n
sequences of length n with symbol frequencies matching P. This lets us write the
total growth equation as a sum over all type classes

--- Page 8 ---
8 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
m
(cid:88)(cid:89) (cid:88)
(31) R (W)= wnpi r
n i s
P i=1 s∈Tn(P)
where r is the product of returns obtained by following sequence s, taking the
s
returnofwhicheverassetthesequenceselectsateachtimeperiod. Thisisthesame
exponential set of sequences as before, just grouped by type and with the common
sequence weight (cid:81)m wnpi factored out per class.
i=1 i
As stated earlier, the weights sum to one across the full set of sequences. Each
sequenceweightrepresentsabudgetallocationtothatparticularmulti-periodcom-
pounding process that bets on one specific symbol per time period. A particular
typeclassrepresentsallpermutationsofagivensequence. Becauseallpermutations
intheclasshavethesameweight,it’snotpossibletowagermoreonaparticularse-
quencethananyothersequenceintheset. Thelargertheset(highertheentropy),
thelessspecificthewager. Coverusedthisfacttoshowthatwecanasymptotically
achieve the same growth as an ideal adversary, one that knows the “rules” (the
true odds) but not the future. The key insight is that even such an adversary is
similarly restricted and can bet with high concentration only if the set is small
(low entropy). By using the entropy of the sequence to size the wager, one can
wager proportionally to the unknown optimal bet with only a polynomial penalty
tomakethewagerssumtoone(thecostofuniversality). Fromatraditionalfinance
perspective, this is a truly surprising result. The idea of optimal investing without
any informational advantage seems paradoxical, but it’s really a demonstration of
howpowerfulitistoapplyinformationtheorytotheinvestingproblem. Mostpeo-
ple who are aware of Cover’s universal portfolio know it as a beautifully abstract
and elegant yet likely impractical algorithm due to transaction costs. But as I’ll
demonstrate, this isn’t just a scaffold for making universal portfolios. Cover’s idea
to rewrite the traditional product of sums investing problem as a sum of products
reveals the information structure of the general investing problem. It’s not just
useful for Cover’s very abstract idea – it’s an essential tool that I argue makes the
investingproblemlessopaqueandmoreaccessibletothetechniquesofinformation
theory.
Wewillnowdemonstratehowtheweight,whichsumstooneacrossallsequences,
concentrates in the particular type class P = W, the set of all permutations of
sequences with frequencies matching the portfolio weights. We first establish this
using combinatorics and Stirling’s approximation. Because this approximation is
only asymptotically valid, we then refine the argument using KL divergence to
show how the total weight assigned to non-dominant sets declines exponentially
with both divergence and time. Once this type class concentration is established
we will use it to simplify the growth function to reveal the information theoretic
terms in the investment process.
The size of T (W) is the number of permutations of sequences of length n and
n
with n =w n. The size of this set is given by the multinomial
i i
(cid:18) (cid:19)
n n! n!
(32) = =
n ,n ,n ,...,n n !n !n !...n !
(cid:81)m
n !
1 2 3 m 1 2 3 m i=1 i
For the T (W) type class, this is
n

--- Page 9 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 9
n!
(33)
(cid:81)m
(nw )!
i=1 i
Using Stirling’s Approximation
(34) log(n!)=nlog(n)−n+O(log(n))
Ignoring thesublinear term (this approximation will be revisited below), we can
rewrite the cardinality, using T (W) to denote both the cardinality and the set
n
where it’s unambiguous:
(cid:32)m (cid:33)
(cid:89)
(35) log(T (W))=log(n!)−log (nw )!
n i
i=1
m
(cid:88)
(36) =nlog(n)−n− (nw log(nw )−nw )
i i i
i=1
m m m
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
(37) =nlog(n)−n− nw log(n)− nw log(w )+ nw
i i i i
i=1 i=1 i=1
m m m
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
(38) =nlog(n)−n−nlog(n) w −n w log(w )+n w
i i i i
i=1 i=1 i=1
m
(cid:88)
(39) =−n w log(w )
i i
i=1
m (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) 1
(40) =n w log
i w
i
i=1
(41) =nH(W)
The cardinality is therefore
(42) T (W)=enH(W)
n
Theweightassignedtoasequencesisdenotedbyw . Thisistheproductofthe
s
portfolio weights for each period corresponding to the selected symbol. Because all
sequences within the type class T (W) have the same symbol frequencies (they are
n
permutations of each other), they share the same sequence weight. The sequence
weight w for each sequence s∈T (W) is
s n
m
(cid:89)
(43) w = wnwi
s i
i=1
Applying logs, this becomes

--- Page 10 ---
10 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
(cid:32)m (cid:33)
(cid:89)
(44) log(w )=log wnwi
s i
i=1
m
(cid:88)
(45) = nw log(w )
i i
i=1
m (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) 1
(46) =− nw log
i w
i
i=1
(47) =−nH(W)
The weight for each sequence is therefore
(48) w =e−nH(W)
s
At least for large n (with precise refinement later), the sum of this per-sequence
weight across all of the sequences in the set is approximately
(cid:88)
(49) w =e−nH(W)enH(W) =1
s
s∈Tn(W)
This indicates that the weight is concentrated in the set of sequences from the
type class P = W. Again this is the set of all permutations of sequences with
frequencies matching the portfolio weight vector. It is the uniform wager on all
multi-period, horse-race style investments with frequencies matching the portfolio.
This concentration argument relied on Stirling’s Approximation. Although this
is asymptotically accurate and it identifies the dominant type class, it overstates
the finite log cardinality.
TheintuitionisthatShannon’sentropy,whichcharacterizesaninfinitestochastic
source, is greater than the complexity of a finite object with the same frequency
distribution. The finite case is formally in the domain of Kolmogorov Complexity
Theory [10], but from a coding perspective, the reason is because knowing the full
distribution and the number of symbols remaining reduces the uncertainty.
We can use KL divergence to more precisely bound the weight mass assigned to
type classes that are different from W. The weight for any type class P is (cid:81) wnpi
i i
andthecardinalityisapproximately|T (P)|=enH(P). Thelogofthetotaldensity
n
assigned to the set of sequences in the class is
(50)
(cid:32) (cid:33)
(cid:89) (cid:88)
log wnpienH(P) = (np log(w ))+nH(P) =−nH(P,W)+nH(p)
i i i
i
(51) =−nD (P∥W)
KL
The total weight concentrated on sequences in that set declines exponentially
with the divergence from the portfolio weight vector W and with the number of
periods:
(52) e−nDKL(P∥W)

--- Page 11 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 11
This gives us confidence that we can ignore sequences that do not match the
portfolio weights, with that confidence increasing exponentially with both the di-
vergence (frequency mismatch) and the number of time periods. This lets us sim-
plify the original growth equation, rewriting it as a single product rather than a
complex sum over classes.
The original product expression
m
(cid:88)(cid:89) (cid:88)
(53) R (W)= wnpi r
n i s
P i=1 s∈Tn(P)
can now be reduced to
(cid:88)
(54) e−nH(W) r
s
s∈Tn(W)
Because |T (W)| = enH(W), this is simply the average return across all multi-
n
periodsequencereturnsintheclassofsequencesthatlookliketheportfolio(symbol
frequencies equal to portfolio weights).
Now assume that W∗ is the optimal portfolio weight vector– the portfolio that
maximizes the expected log return. As we showed above, almost all of its mass is
assigned to the set of sequences with frequencies matching the portfolio weights.
If we invest using any other weight vector W ̸= W∗, the performance of this
suboptimalportfoliois(ignoringallbutthedominantsetfortheoptimalportfolio)
m
(cid:89) nw∗ (cid:88)
(55) R (W)= w i r
n i s
i=1 s∈Tn(W∗)
 
m
(cid:88) (cid:88)
(56) log(R n (W))= nw i ∗log(w i )+log r s
i=1 s∈Tn(W∗)
 
(cid:88)
(57) =−nH(W∗,W)+log r s
s∈Tn(W∗)
 
(cid:88)
(58) =−nH(W∗)−nD KL (W∗∥W)+log r s
s∈Tn(W∗)
Defining R¯ as the per-period geometric growth rate
T(W)
(59) R¯n = (cid:88) r
T(W) s
s∈Tn(W)
The expected log return g(W) is therefore
(60) g(W)= lim log(R n (W)) =log (cid:0) R¯ (cid:1) −H(W∗)−D (W∗∥W)
n→∞ n T(W∗) KL
The general case is more complicated than the classic Kelly or the horse race
market problem. But we once again see that Kelly’s objective has factored the
investing problem into the same three term decomposition: a money term (payoff

--- Page 12 ---
12 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
/ rules of the game), an entropy term (uncertainty) and a divergence term. As
before, the first two terms don’t depend on our portfolio allocation. The only way
to maximize the compounding growth rate is to minimize the drag or friction from
thedivergencewhichmeasures,inbits1,thedifferencebetweenourdistributionand
theunknowntruedistribution. Thereforeinvestingis,fundamentally,acompression
problem.
5. Practical Applications
5.1. Backtesting. One of the challenges when backtesting and A/B testing of
strategies is that market data is notoriously non-stationary. Even the log objective
will be sensitive to extreme and atypical historical events. This makes the average
difficulttointerpretinastatisticalsensewhencomparingstrategies. Butrecallthat
the first two terms in equation 60 (money term and entropy term) do not depend
on the allocation, so they are constant across strategies in a given backtest. The
absolute value has no real statistical meaning, but the difference measures, in bits,
the change in the divergence relative to some unknown ideal. This is reminiscent
of Gibbs free energy in statistical mechanics.
(61) g(W )=log (cid:0) R¯ (cid:1) −H(W∗)−D (W∗∥W )
A T(W∗) KL A
(62) g(W )=log (cid:0) R¯ (cid:1) −H(W∗)−D (W∗∥W )
B T(W∗) KL B
(63) g(W )−g(W )=D (W∗∥W )−D (W∗∥W )
B A KL A KL B
5.2. MDL, Market Prediction, and Strategy Performance. Markets are
high-dimensional, sparse, and non-stationary. This makes it very difficult to sepa-
ratesignalfromnoise. Itisespeciallychallengingfortechniquesbasedonstatistical
learning theory [20] which rely on resampling from a stationary stochastic source
to detect overfitting and generalization. Although statistical learning theory is the
dominant machine learning paradigm, it’s not the only one. Information theory
offers alternative learning paradigms, including the MDL principle [8, 10]; see [16]
for a discussion of prediction, compression, and the relationship between models
and data. The key insight is that randomness is incompressible, so generalization
isaboutfindingaparsimonious,compressivedescription. Therelationshipbetween
strategy performance and prediction performance is more direct when both are
treated as information theoretic questions. In other words, it’s easier to draw a
clear line between signal improvements and strategy improvements when both are
measured in bits.
5.3. Winner Fraction and VC-style Investing. Kelly’s objective is convex.
This means that there is a unique solution, and if we can model the joint return
distribution,thenwecansolvethegeneralcaseefficientlyusingconvexoptimization
techniques.
But it’s often not feasible to accurately model the joint distribution. Consider
theproblemofventurecapitalstyleinvesting. Theinvestorhastodecidehowmuch
capital to allocate, often years before any real clarity on future cash flow.
We saw from equation 54 that the optimal portfolio concentrates on a particu-
lar type class. Finding that optimal type class is equivalent to solving the convex
1Throughout, log denotes the natural logarithm. Results are stated in bits with the under-
standingthatbaseconversionisascalingconstant.

--- Page 13 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 13
optimization problem which is not feasible without a precise joint probability dis-
tributionoffuturereturns. Evenwithoutthefullreturndistribution, thestructure
of this decomposition motivates a useful heuristic: winner fraction investing.
Theprincipleistoinvestinproportiontothefractionofuniverseswhereagiven
asset dominates the candidate set. In other words, the probability that a given
startup “wins” relative to the rest of the contemplated startups. Although this is
still nontrivial to predict, it is far less complicated than the full joint distribution
– it does not require modeling the actual returns, just the probability of winning.
Itwillnowbeshownthatthisheuristicisapproximatelyoptimal. Thelowerthe
entropy, or the more extreme the “wins,” the better the approximation.
Let W∗ be the growth-maximum portfolio, and let W′ be the vector of winner
probabilities, in other words the probability that the ith startup dominates the
candidate set.
(64) R n (W∗) =
e−nH(W∗)(cid:80)
s∈Tn(W∗) r s
R (W′) e−nH(W′)(cid:80) r
n s∈Tn(W′) s
The numerator and denominator represent averages over their respective type
classes.
Recallthateachsequenceisanexclusivebetononlyoneassetpertimeperiod. A
typeclassrepresentsallsequencepermutationswithagivenfrequencymatchingthe
portfolioweightvector. Thelargestreturninthewinnerfractionsetisconstructed
by stringing together the dominant asset per period. This sequence must be in the
winner fraction set. Let r be the return for that sequence. By construction,
max
it must also be at least as large as every sequence in the optimal set T (W∗).
n
Therefore
r
(65) ∀ s ≤1
s∈Tn(W∗)
r
max
(66) R n (W∗) ≤
e−nH(W∗)(cid:80)
s∈Tn(W∗) r s
R (W′) e−nH(W′)r
n max
1 (cid:80) rs
(67) ≤
|Tn(W∗)| s∈Tn(W∗) rmax
e−nH(W′)
(68)
≤enH(W′)
This shows the ratio of the optimal to the heuristic solution.
Taking limits to find expectation, we see
log(enH(W′))
(69) g(W∗)−g(W′)≤ lim =H(W′)
n→∞ n
Thedifferencebetweengrowth-optimalportfolioandthewinner-fractionportfo-
lio is bounded by the entropy of the winner-fraction distribution. That entropy is
itself bounded by the cardinality of the candidate set, so this heuristic is especially
useful when the candidate set is small or when the return distribution is extreme.
To my knowledge, this heuristic and proof of the entropy bound are both original.

--- Page 14 ---
14 OSCARSTIFFELMAN
6. Conclusion
The Kelly criterion describes how to allocate capital in simple games of chance
with known odds and edge. It is a closed form optimal solution to Kelly’s log
wealth objective. But it turns out that Kelly’s objective is itself optimal among all
objectives. And this fact reframes the investing problem itself.
In finance, we often think of risk and reward as two different axes: for a given
amount of risk, we maximize return. This goes back to the 1940’s and Markowitz’s
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) [12]. A concern with MPT is that markets are
heavy-tail and so diversification (averaging) may not reduce risk (variance) [17].
This is fundamentally a statistical concern. But even if markets were Gaussian, it
would still be suboptimal because Kelly’s objective is uniquely optimal. To justify
that, we have to turn from statistics to information theory.
Instead of thinking of risk and reward as two different axes, Kelly proposed
maximizing a single objective, the logarithm of wealth over uncertainty. In other
words the expectation or the probability weighted average log return. Samuelson
argued against this idea, successfully keeping it out of mainstream economics.
We now know because of Tom Cover’s work at Stanford that this was not a
subjective, arbitrary utility function as Samuelson believed. It is the objectively
optimalwaytoinvest. Itiscompetitivelyoptimalinagame-theoreticsense,assum-
ing neither party has an information advantage. It dominates over almost every
market sequence. Even over the short term.
WiththehelpofatransformationfromCover’suniversalportfolioalgorithm,we
nowunderstandwhatissopowerfulaboutKelly’sobjective. Itrevealstheinforma-
tionstructureoftheinvestingproblem,factoringitintothreeterms: amoneyterm
(payoff / rules of the game), an entropy term (uncertainty) and a divergence term.
The only way to maximize compounding growth rate is to minimize the friction
from that divergence term. Fundamentally, investing is a compression problem.
References
1. Paul H. Algoet and Thomas M. Cover, Asymptotic optimality and asymptotic equipartition
properties of log-optimum investment,TheAnnalsofProbability16(1988),no.2,876–898.
2. Robert M. Bell and Thomas M. Cover, Competitive optimality of logarithmic investment,
MathematicsofOperationsResearch5(1980),no.2,161–166.
3. ,Game-theoretic optimal portfolios,ManagementScience34(1988),no.6,724–733.
4. Daniel Bernoulli, Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk, Econometrica 22
(1954),no.1,23–36,TranslationbyLouiseSommerof“SpecimenTheoriaeNovaedeMensura
Sortis,”Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae,5:175–192,1738.
5. ThomasM.Cover,Universal portfolios,MathematicalFinance1(1991),no.1,1–29.
6. , Shannon and investment, IEEE Information Theory Society Newsletter 48 (1998),
no.2,10–11,SpecialGoldenJubileeIssue.
7. Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas, Elements of information theory, 2nd ed., Wiley-
Interscience,Hoboken,NJ,2006.
8. PeterD.Gru¨nwald,Theminimumdescriptionlengthprinciple,MITPress,Cambridge,MA,
2007.
9. J.L.Kelly,Jr.,A new interpretation of information rate,BellSystemTechnicalJournal35
(1956),no.4,917–926.
10. MingLiandPaulM.B.Vit´anyi, An introduction to kolmogorov complexity and its applica-
tions,4thed.,TextsinComputerScience,Springer,Cham,2019.
11. Leonard C. MacLean, Edward O. Thorp, and William T. Ziemba, The Kelly capital growth
investment criterion: Theory and practice,WorldScientific,2011.
12. HarryMarkowitz,Portfolio selection,TheJournalofFinance7(1952),no.1,77–91.

--- Page 15 ---
INVESTING IS COMPRESSION 15
13. RobertC.MertonandPaulA.Samuelson,Fallacyofthelog-normalapproximationtooptimal
portfoliodecision-makingovermanyperiods,JournalofFinancialEconomics1(1974),no.1,
67–94.
14. Paul A. Samuelson, The “fallacy” of maximizing the geometric mean in long sequences of
investing or gambling, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 68 (1971), no. 10,
2493–2496.
15. ,Whyweshouldnotmakemeanlogofwealthbigthoughyearstoactarelong,Journal
ofBanking&Finance3(1979),no.4,305–307.
16. OscarStiffelman,The least wrong model is not in the data,2014.
17. NassimNicholasTaleb,Statistical consequences of fat tails,STEMAcademicPress,2020.
18. EdwardO.Thorp,Beat the dealer: A winning strategy for the game of twenty-one,2nded.,
RandomHouse,NewYork,1966.
19. , A man for all markets: From Las Vegas to Wall Street, how I beat the dealer and
the market,RandomHouse,2017.
20. VladimirN.Vapnik,Statistical learning theory,Wiley-Interscience,NewYork,1998.