--- Page 1 ---
Structural Dynamics of G5 Stock Markets During
Exogenous Shocks: A Random Matrix Theory-Based
Complexity Gap Approach
KundanMukhiaa,ImranAnsarib,∗,Md.Nurujjamana
aDepartmentofPhysics,NationalInstituteofTechnologySikkim,,Sikkim,737139,,India
bDepartmentofManagementStudies,IndianInstituteofScience,,Bengaluru,,Karnataka,India
Abstract
Weidentifyarobuststructuralsignatureofstockmarketsduringexogenousshock
events by analyzing collective return dynamics across G5 countries. Using Ran-
dom Matrix Theory, we introduce the complexity gap, defined as the difference
between the normalized largest eigenvalue and the average pairwise correlation,
to quantify changes in market structure. This measure reveals a consistent three-
phase pattern across multiple shocks, including the 2025 U.S. tariff event, the
COVID-19 crisis, and country-specific shocks in Japan and China during 2024.
Before a shock, markets show a positive complexity gap, reflecting a rich struc-
ture with multiple interacting factors. During shocks, the gap collapses to near
zero,signalingstrongsynchronizationunderasingledominantmode. Post-shock
recovery follows a nonmonotonic path: an initial widening (a false recovery), a
temporary recollapse, and final sustained restoration. This pattern holds at both
market and sector levels and across global and local shocks. Ordinal entropy
analysis confirms the same sequence of collapse and false recovery in directional
diversity. Wefurtherdemonstratethatlowercomplexitygapvaluespredicthigher
futureportfoliovolatility,especiallyaftershocks,establishingitsvalueasastate-
dependent risk indicator. For investors, initial gap widening may mislead, while
sustained widening signals genuine structural stabilization. These findings reveal
a robust structural signature governing financial market dynamics during crisis
andrecoveryperiods.
∗Correspondingauthor
Emailaddresses: kundanmukhia07@gmail.com(KundanMukhia),
imranansari@iisc.ac.in(ImranAnsari),md.nurujjaman@nitsikkim.ac.in(Md.
Nurujjaman)
6202
rpA
12
]TS.nif-q[
1v70191.4062:viXra

--- Page 2 ---
1. Introduction
Financialmarketsarecomplexadaptivesystemscharacterizedbyinteractions
among thousands of assets, where collective dynamics emerge from the aggre-
gation of individual behaviors [1, 2]. These dynamics evolve continuously in re-
sponsetochangingeconomicconditions,policydecisions,andexternalshocks[3,
4, 5]. Under normal conditions, asset returns exhibit heterogeneous correlation
structuresreflectingsectoralorganization,economiclinkages,andmultiplesources
of risk [6, 7, 8]. However, during periods of financial shock, markets often un-
dergo abrupt transitions toward strongly synchronized behavior, in which assets
move collectively, and structural distinctions between sectors become less pro-
nounced or even disappear [9, 10]. Such episodes, observed during events such
as the COVID-19 crisis and more recent global shocks, including the 2025 U.S.
tariff announcement, highlight the fragility of diversification and the emergence
ofdominantmarket-wideforces.
Correlation-based approaches provide a natural framework for studying the
collective organization of financial markets [3, 6, 11, 8, 12]. Empirical studies
consistently report a significant increase in correlations during crisis periods, re-
flecting the growing influence of common factors [13, 14, 15]. However, av-
erage correlation alone does not fully characterize changes in market structure
[16, 17]. Two markets with similar average correlations may exhibit fundamen-
tally different internal organizations, ranging from well-defined sectoral cluster-
ingtonearlyuniformcollectivemotion[7,18]. Capturingthisdistinctionrequires
measuresthatgobeyondaggregatestatisticsanddirectlyquantifystructuralorga-
nization. Acharacteristicfeatureofsystemiceventsisthehomogenizationofcor-
relations across assets, where pairwise correlations become increasingly similar,
andacommonmodedominatesthedynamicsofindividualassets[14,19,20]. In
this regime, sectoral organization weakens, and diversification benefits diminish,
indicating a loss of structural heterogeneity in the market [6, 21, 22]. While this
phenomenon has been widely documented, quantifying the degree of structural
heterogeneity and its collapse remains challenging. Existing approaches, includ-
ing network filtering techniques and spectral methods based on Random Matrix
Theory(RMT),donotprovideadirect,simple,andeasilycomparablescalarmea-
suretocapturethisbehaviorconsistentlyacrossdifferentmarketsandtimeperiods
[23,16,24,25,26].
The application of the RMT to financial correlation matrices has emerged as
a well-established framework for separating meaningful economic signals from
random noise [27, 28]. The pioneering studies of Laloux et al. [23] and Plerou et
al. [29] showed that the bulk of the eigenvalue spectrum of empirical correlation
matrices closely follows the Marcˇenko–Pastur distribution expected for purely
2

--- Page 3 ---
random matrices, but the largest eigenvalue deviates significantly. This dominant
eigenvalue, commonly referred to as the market mode, captures the collective co-
movementsharedbyallassetsinthemarket. Subsequentresearchhasshownthat
these spectral properties undergo systematic changes during periods of financial
stress. Empirical evidence from major crises, including the 2008 global financial
crisis,theEuropeanSovereignDebtCrisis,andtheCOVID-19pandemic,consis-
tently reveals a sharp increase in the largest eigenvalue, accompanied by a com-
pression of the remaining spectrum [30, 31, 32, 13, 33]. Together, these effects
indicateatransitiontowardstrongermarket-widesynchronizationandareduction
in effective dimensionality, implying that fewer independent factors are sufficient
to explain asset returns. Related research has examined the average pairwise cor-
relation coefficient as a more direct measure of market integration. Studies such
as Sandoval and Franca [13] and Kenett et al. [34] show that average correlations
increase markedly during crisis periods, reflecting the breakdown of diversifica-
tionbenefits. Whilebothapproachescaptureheightenedcollectivebehavior,they
dosofromdistinctperspectives: thelargesteigenvaluereflectsthedominanceofa
global factor, whereas average correlation aggregates both systemic and idiosyn-
craticinteractions. Despitetheirwidespreaduse,thesemeasureshavelargelybeen
analyzedinisolation. Asaresult,thestructuralrelationshipbetweenthedominant
marketmodeandaggregatepairwiseco-movementremainsunderexplored,limit-
ingourabilitytodirectlyquantifymarketheterogeneity[16,17,25]. Recentwork
by González et al. [35] shows that the largest eigenvalue serves as a proxy for
market spillovers and corresponds to the Sharpe market factor, while the second-
largest eigenvalue exhibits counter-cyclical behavior, suggesting a potential de-
fensiveroleduringperiodsofhighvolatility. However,theexistingliteraturedoes
notdevelopaunifiedframeworklinkingthedominantmarketmodetothebroader
correlationstructureanditsevolutionacrossmarketshocks.
Despitetheextensiveliteratureinthisarea,severalimportantquestionsremain
unresolved. Most studies have compared discrete market states, pre-crisis, crisis,
and post-crisis, rather than tracking the continuous temporal evolution of mar-
ket structure following a shock. Whether recovery is smooth and monotonic, or
whetheritpassesthroughintermediatephases,remainslargelyunexplored. Inad-
dition,themajorityofstudiesexamineoneshockeventoronemarketinisolation,
making it difficult to distinguish between responses that are generic to all crises
and those that are specific to the nature of the shock. Sectoral dynamics within
theRMTframeworkhavealsoreceivedlimitedsystematicattention;market-level
analyses may mask heterogeneous sector-level responses that are critical for un-
derstanding how shocks propagate through the economic system. Finally, the
practicalvalueofspectralcomplexitymeasuresforportfolioriskmanagementhas
3

--- Page 4 ---
not been evaluated in a systematic and comparative way across multiple markets
andshocks.
To address these gaps, we introduce the complexity gap, defined as the differ-
encebetweenthenormalizedlargesteigenvalueandtheaveragepairwisecorrela-
tion of the return correlation matrix. This scalar measure captures the deviation
between the dominant market mode and the overall level of co-movement, and
we argue that it provides a natural and interpretable indicator of structural mar-
ket heterogeneity. When the complexity gap is large, the market is organized
around a strong dominant factor while retaining meaningful secondary structure;
when it collapses, the market transitions toward uniform collective motion. We
apply this measure to multiple markets and sectors across several distinct shock
events, including the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2025 U.S. tariff announcement,
and country-specific shocks in Japan and China in 2024. This allows us to exam-
inewhetherthecomplexitygapexhibitsaconsistentthree-phasetemporalpattern
aroundexogenousshocks,characterizedbycollapse,falserecovery,andsustained
structural restoration. We find that markets exhibit a robust three-phase response
pattern consisting of an initial collapse of the gap, a transient ’false recovery’
widening, and a final sustained restoration of structural diversity. We further
show that while the sign of the complexity gap inverts at the sectoral level due
to higher intra-industry homogeneity, the three-phase dynamic remains a scale-
invariantfeatureofthesystem. Finally,wevalidatethesefindingsusingadistinct
ordinalentropyframeworkanddemonstratethatthecomplexitygapcontainssig-
nificantpredictiveinformationforportfoliorisk,particularlyasastate-dependent
indicator of post-shock volatility. We further show that while domestic shocks
produce localized disruptions, the 2025 U.S. tariff announcement triggers a glob-
allysynchronizedresponseacrossallG5marketsandsectors.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the
dataandoutlinesthemethodologicalframeworkemployedinthisstudy,including
the construction of correlation matrices, the RMT-based spectral decomposition,
and the formulation of the Complexity Gap as a measure of structural market dy-
namics. Section3presentstheempiricalfindings,coveringbothmarket-wideand
sectoral analyses, the identification of recovery dynamics across different shock
events,andtheimplicationsoftheseresultsforportfolioriskassessment. Finally,
Section4summarizesthefindingsofourstudy.
2. MethodofAnalysis
To identify the structural signature of stock markets during exogenous shock
events, we applied several analytical methods. Initially, we use Random Ma-
trix Theory (RMT) to decompose the rolling correlation matrix of stock returns
4

--- Page 5 ---
and extract the normalized largest eigenvalue λnorm(t) and the average pairwise
max
correlation ρ(t). This is followed by the definition of the complexity gap ∆(t)=
λnorm(t)−ρ(t),whichservesasourcentralmeasurefortrackingstructuralchanges
max
inmarketdynamicsacrosspre-shock,shock,andpost-shockregimes. Wesupport
this with an ordinal entropy analysis of cross-sectional return patterns to vali-
date the observed structural shifts. Finally, we employ portfolio optimization to
evaluate whether the complexity gap carries predictive information about future
portfoliorisk. Furtherdetailsoneachofthesestepsarediscussedbelow.
2.1. RandomMatrixTheory
We analyze daily closing prices P(t) for stocks across the G5 markets. To
i
mitigatethenon-stationarityinherentinpricelevels,thetimeseriesareconverted
intologarithmicreturnsdefinedas
P(t)
i
r(t)=ln , (1)
i
P(t−1)
i
where P(t) denotes the closing price of asset i at time t. Within each rolling
i
window,thereturnseriesarestandardizedusingz-scorenormalization[36,37]:
r(t)−⟨r⟩
i i
r˜(t)= , (2)
i
σ
i
where ⟨r⟩ and σ denote the sample mean and standard deviation of stock i com-
i i
puted over the corresponding time window. This normalization ensures that the
standardizedreturnssatisfy⟨r˜⟩=0andVar(r˜)=1.
i i
ArollingtimewindowoffixedlengthT =60tradingdaysisappliedtocapture
thetemporalevolutionofmarketcorrelations. Foreachtimeindexτ,weconstruct
thereturnsubmatrix
(cid:8) (cid:9)
R = r(t)|i=1,...,N , t =τ−T +1,...,τ , (3)
τ i c
which contains the returns of all N assets over the preceding T trading days.
c
ThematrixR ∈RNc×T representsthelocalreturndynamicsusedtocomputethe
τ
correlationmatrixattimeτ.
The equal-time Pearson correlation matrix is constructed within each rolling
windowas
1 τ
C (t)= ∑ r˜(t)r˜ (t), (4)
ij i j
T
t=τ−T+1
wherer˜(t)denotesthestandardizedreturnofassetiattimet andT isthewindow
i
length. This yields a symmetric positive semi-definite correlation matrix C(t)∈
5

--- Page 6 ---
RNc×Nc,withdiagonalelementsequaltounityandoff-diagonalelementsC (t)∈
ij
[−1,1]capturingthepairwiselinearco-movementbetweenassetsiand j.
ThecorrelationmatrixC(t)isdiagonalizedthroughtheeigenvalueequation
C(t)v (t)=λ (t)v (t), (5)
k k k
yieldingN realeigenvaluesorderedas
c
λ (t)≥λ (t)≥···≥λ (t), (6)
0 1 Nc−1
and their corresponding orthonormal eigenvectors v (t). In the RMT framework,
k
for a purely random correlation matrix, all eigenvalues are expected to fall within
thetheoreticalbounds[λ ,λ ],where
− +
(cid:32) (cid:115) (cid:33)2
1 T
λ = 1± , Q= , (7)
±
Q N
c
with T the window length and N the number of stocks [23, 16, 27]. Eigenvalues
c
lyingwithinthisintervalareconsistentwithrandomnoiseandcarrynosignificant
economic information, whereas eigenvalues exceeding λ reflect genuine collec-
+
tivebehaviorinthemarket[29]. Thelargesteigenvalueλ (t)consistentlyexceeds
0
λ acrossallmarketsandtimeperiodsstudiedhere,confirmingthatitcarriesgen-
+
uinecollectivemarketinformation. Thisdominanteigenvalue,commonlyreferred
toasthemarketmode,capturesthedegreeofglobalsynchronizationsharedbyall
assetsandiswidelyinterpretedasanindicatorofsystemicrisk[16,30].
To facilitate comparison across markets with different numbers of assets N ,
c
thelargesteigenvalueisnormalizedas
λ (t)−1
λnorm(t)= 0 , 0≤λnorm(t)≤1, (8)
N −1
c
where λnorm = 0 corresponds to a fully uncorrelated market with λ ≈ 1, and
0
λnorm = 1 indicates the theoretical limit of perfect synchronization in which all
assetsmoveidentically.
2.2. TheComplexityGap
Tocharacterizethestructuralorganizationofthemarketbeyondthedominant
mode alone, we compute the average pairwise correlation as the mean of all off-
diagonalelementsofC(t):
ρ(t)=⟨C (t)⟩ . (9)
ij i̸=j
6

--- Page 7 ---
While λnorm(t) reflects the strength of the single dominant market factor, ρ(t)
aggregates all pairwise interactions, including sectoral and idiosyncratic compo-
nents. These two quantities therefore, characterize collective market behavior
from complementary perspectives. We define the complexity gap as the differ-
ence:
∆(t)=λnorm(t)−ρ(t). (10)
This scalar measure captures the deviation between the dominant market mode
andtheoveralllevelofpairwiseco-movement. Alargepositivegap,∆(t)>0,in-
dicates a structurally rich market in which multiple interacting components, such
as industry sectors, contribute to the correlation structure alongside the common
market trend. When the gap collapses toward zero, ∆(t)≈0, the correlation ma-
trixapproachesaneffectiverank-onestructure,indicatingthatstockdynamicsare
governed almost entirely by a single global factor and structural diversity is sup-
pressed. Thecomplexitygap,therefore,providesadirect,interpretable,andeasily
comparablescalarindicatorofstructuralmarketheterogeneitythatcanbetracked
continuouslyovertimeacrossdifferentmarketsandshockevents.
2.3. OrdinalEntropy
Theordinalpatternapproachtransformsatimeseriesintoasequenceofrank-based
symbols, providing a robust description of its temporal structure that is invariant
undermonotonictransformationsandresistanttooutliers[38]. Givenatimeseries
{x }oflengthT,oneconstructsd-dimensionalstatevectors
t
X =(x ,x ,...,x ), (11)
t t t+τ t+(d−1)τ
where d is the embedding dimension and τ is the time delay. Each vector X
t
is mapped to a permutation π of {0,1,...,d−1} that sorts its components in
ascending order. The relative frequency p(π) of each of the d! possible ordinal
patterns is then computed, and the permutation entropy is defined as the Shannon
entropyofthisdistribution:
H =−∑p(π)logp(π). (12)
π
Whenallpatternsappearequallyoften,H attainsitsmaximumlog(d!),indicating
maximal complexity; a low entropy value signals that a small number of patterns
dominatethedynamics.
In this work, we apply the ordinal pattern framework to the cross-section of
stock returns rather than a single time series. For each 60-day rolling window,
we consider the final three daily returns of every stock (d =3, τ =1). For each
7

--- Page 8 ---
stock, we determine its 3-day ordinal pattern, yielding one of the 3!=6 possible
permutations. Aggregating over all N stocks in the window, we obtain the empir-
ical distribution p (t) of patterns across the market. The Ordinal Entropy of the
k
marketattimet isthen
6
H (t)=−∑ p (t)logp (t), (13)
ord k k
k=1
which quantifies the diversity of short-term directional behavior: a value near
log6 ≈ 1.79 nats reflects heterogeneous trading sequences, whereas a drop in
H (t) indicates that a large fraction of stocks synchronize onto the same or-
ord
dinal pattern. By construction, H (t) is consistent with the RMT Complex-
ord
ity Gap ∆(t), enabling a direct comparison between macro-structural and micro-
behavioralaspectsofmarketdynamics.
2.4. PortfolioOptimization
To examine whether the complexity gap contains information about future
portfolio risk, we consider a financial market of N stocks with return vector r =
t
(r ,...,r )⊤. Aportfoliowithweightvectorqhasreturn
1,t N,t
r =q⊤r . (14)
p,t t
LetVdenotethecovariancematrixofreturnsestimatedwithintheformationwin-
dow. Weconstructtheminimum-varianceportfolio(MVP)[39],whichminimizes
portfolioriskforagivenlevelofinvestment,bysolving
min q⊤Vq s.t. q⊤1=1, (15)
q
withtheclosed-formsolution
V−11
q = , (16)
MVP 1⊤V−11
where the Moore–Penrose pseudo-inverse is used for numerical stability. As a
naive benchmark, we also consider the equally weighted portfolio (EWP) [40]
withweightsqEW =1/N,whichrequiresnoparameterestimation.
i
To link portfolio risk to market structure, we compute the correlation matrix
C of standardized returns within each formation window. The normalized largest
eigenvalueis
λ −1
max
λ = , (17)
norm
N−1
8

--- Page 9 ---
andtheaveragepairwisecorrelationis
ρ¯ =⟨C ⟩ . (18)
ij i̸=j
Thecomplexitygapisthendefinedas
∆=λ −ρ¯, (19)
norm
which captures the deviation between the dominant collective market mode and
the average level of pairwise correlations. A large ∆ > 0 reflects a structurally
diversemarket,while∆≈0signalsalossofstructuralheterogeneityunderstrong
market-widesynchronization.
WeemployarollingwindowframeworkconsistingofaT-dayformationwin-
dow followed by an h-day test window. In each formation window, we ran-
domly select N = 10 stocks and generate P = 500 portfolios via Monte Carlo
sampling [41, 42]. Portfolio weights are estimated in the formation window and
appliedout-of-sampletothetestwindow. Therealizedportfoliovolatilityiscom-
putedas
(cid:113)
σtest = Var(rtest), (20)
p,t
and annualized for comparability across windows. For each portfolio, the com-
plexity gap ∆ is recorded from the formation window. The analysis spans all
five G5 markets from January to December 2025. WithW rolling windows and
c
P = 500 portfolios per window, the total number of portfolio observations per
countryisN =W P,giving416,500observationsintotal.
c c
To evaluate the predictive content of ∆ for future portfolio risk, we use three
complementary approaches: Spearman rank correlations between ∆ and realized
MVP volatility, incremental R2 measures that quantify the additional explana-
tory power of ∆ beyond standard benchmark predictors, and a quintile analysis in
whichportfoliosaresortedintofivegroupsbasedon∆toexaminewhetherhigher
structural complexity is systematically associated with lower realized volatility.
ThefullcomputationalprocedureissummarizedinAlgorithm1.
2.5. DataAnalyzed
To identify structural patterns in stock markets during shock periods, we con-
ducttheanalysisacrosstheG5countries,namely,theUnitedStates,China,Japan,
Germany, and India. The analysis period covers two global shocks, the COVID-
19 shock and the 2025 U.S. tariff shock, along with local shocks observed in
JapanandChinain2024. Weselected120stocksfromeachG5country,compris-
ingfivesectors: InformationTechnology(IT),Industrials,Healthcare,Consumer,
9

--- Page 10 ---
Algorithm1PortfolioRiskEvaluation
1: foreachrollingwindoww=1,...,W do
2: DefineformationwindowoflengthT
3: Definesubsequenttestwindowoflengthh
4: Restricttostockswithcompletedatainbothwindows
5: for p=1,...,Pdo
6: RandomlyselectN =10stocks
7: Standardizereturnsinformationwindow
8: ComputecorrelationmatrixC
9: EstimatecovariancematrixV
10: ComputeMVPweights
V−11
q=
1⊤V−11
11: Computecomplexitygap
λ −1
max
∆= −ρ¯
N−1
12:
Computetest-windowportfolioreturnsrtest
p,t
13:
Computerealizedannualizedvolatilityσtest
14:
Store(∆,σtest)
15: endfor
16: endfor
17: Sortallportfoliosby∆
18: PartitionintoquintilesQ k ,k=0,1,2,3,4
19: Computeaveragevolatilityperquintile
1
σ¯(k) = ∑ σtest
|Q | i
k i∈Q
k
10

--- Page 11 ---
and Finance. The stock data were obtained from Yahoo Finance [43] using the
Python package yfinance, and the corresponding list of stock tickers is provided
in Appendix Appendix B. We use daily closing prices from January 1, 2019, to
December 31, 2022, to analyze the COVID-19 shock, and from January 1, 2023,
to December 31, 2025, to examine the 2025 U.S. tariff shock. These time win-
dows are chosen to capture both the pre- and post-shock periods. The results of
theanalysisarepresentedinthefollowingsections.
3. ResultsandDiscussion
Thissectionpresentstheresultsofidentifyingstructuralpatternsinstockmar-
kets during the COVID-19 shock, the 2025 U.S. tariff shock, and local shocks
observed in Japan and China in 2024. In subsections 3.1 and 3.2, we identify a
three-phasestructuralpatterninboththeoverallmarketandsector-wisedynamics
using the RMT-based complexity gap. Subsection 3.4 provides complementary
evidence through an ordinal entropy analysis of cross-sectional return patterns,
confirming the observed sequence of collapse and false recovery. Furthermore,
usingheatmapanalysisinsubsection3.3,weshowthatthe2025U.S.tariffshock
acts as a global shock impacting the G5 stock markets. Finally, in subsection 3.5,
wediscusstheimplicationsofthecomplexitygapforportfoliorisk.
3.1. RMT-BasedMarketDynamicsandComplexityGap
Tounderstandhowthefinancialmarketscollectivelyabsorbandrecoverfrom
exogenous shocks, we apply a dynamic RMT analysis. We calculate the cross-
correlation C(t) using a 60-day rolling window across stocks in each market of
theG5countries. UsingC(t),asdiscussedinthesubsection2.1,wecalculatedthe
normalizedlargesteigenvalueλnorm(t)=(λ (t)−1)/(N−1),whichmeasures
max max
the strength of the market mode. The raw average correlation ρ(t)=⟨C (t)⟩ ,
ij i̸=j
defined as the unfiltered mean of all off-diagonal elements ofC(t), captures both
positive and negative co-movements among stocks. We define the difference be-
tween these two quantities, ∆(t) = λnorm(t)−ρ(t), as the complexity gap. A
max
large gap ∆(t) > 0 indicates a structurally complex market influenced by mul-
tiple factors beyond a single common trend, whereas a small or near-zero gap
∆(t)≈0suggestsalossofstructuraldiversityandmarketbehaviordominatedby
one global factor. Fig. 1 shows the time evolution of λnorm(t), ρ(t), and ∆(t) for
max
the stock markets of the G5 countries namely, the United States, China, Japan,
India, and Germany. The quantities λnorm(t) and ρ(t) are represented by the red
max
andgreenlines,respectively,while∆(t)isshownasashadedblueregion. Thered
dashed vertical line indicates the date on which the administration of U.S. Presi-
dentDonaldTrumpannouncedaglobaltariffpolicyfor2025. Thisannouncement
11

--- Page 12 ---
representsanexogenousshockandprovidesanaturalexperimenttoexaminemar-
ket behavior. Despite geographic and economic diversity, all five markets exhibit
aconsistentthree-phasepatterninthetimeevolutionofthesequantities.
3.1.1. Pre-ShockMarketStructure
In this study, we define the period before the tariff announcement by the ad-
ministration of U.S. President Donald Trump as the pre-event period. As shown
in Figs. 1(a)–1(e), during this period, the stock markets of the G5 countries ex-
hibitdistinctcountry-specificdynamicsandpatternsreflectingtheirrespectivedo-
mestic economic conditions and market structures. In this pre-event period, both
λnorm(t) and ρ(t) fluctuate according to the individual dynamics of each market.
max
Throughout this period, λnorm(t) generally exceeds ρ(t), resulting in a positive
max
complexity gap ∆(t) > 0. Although temporary deviations are observed in some
markets during short time intervals, the overall separation between the two quan-
tities remains positive. These variations in ∆(t) arise from country-specific mar-
ket dynamics and local shocks affecting individual markets. The persistence of
∆(t)>0 during most of the pre-event period indicates the presence of additional
collectivemodesbeyondthedominantmarketfactor. Suchexcesseigenvaluecon-
tributions arise from internal market structures, including industry sectors and
other economically related stock groupings that exhibit correlated price move-
mentsindependentoftheglobaltrend. Thequantityρ(t)capturestheneteffectof
all pairwise interactions, incorporating both positive and negative co-movements.
Its systematic separation from λnorm(t), quantified by the complexity gap ∆(t),
max
therefore serves as a measure of internal market structure. A wide gap implies
thatmarketdynamicsarenotfullygovernedbyasinglecommonfactorbutinstead
reflect the coexistence of multiple interacting components within the correlation
matrix. Therefore, the pre-event period is characterized by a high-complexity
market state in which sector-specific information and intra-market interactions
playasignificantrole. Althoughbriefintervalsofgapcontractionareobservedin
somemarketsduetolocalshocks,theoveralldominanceof∆(t)>0suggeststhat
thisstructuralcomplexityrepresentsthebaselineconditionofthefinancialsystem
beforeperturbationbytheexogenousshock.
3.1.2. Shock-InducedSynchronization
After the tariff announcement by the U.S administration in April, 2025, the
marketstructureundergoesaclearstructuraltransitionacrossallG5countries,as
shown in Figs. 1(a)–1(e). The vertical red dashed line in Figs. 1(a)–1(e) marks
the date of the tariff announcement. Following this point, both λnorm(t) and ρ(t)
max
increase sharply across all G5 markets, while the complexity gap ∆(t) rapidly
12

--- Page 13 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
Figure 1: Time evolution of RMT-based complexity metrics for G5 stock markets. The red line
representsthenormalizedlargesteigenvalueλnorm(t), thegreenlineshowstherawaveragecor-
max
relationρ(t),andtheshadedregionbetweenthemdenotesthecomplexitygap∆(t). Thevertical
red dashed line marks the U.S. tariff announcement in April 2025. Across all markets, we ob-
serveaconsistentthree-phaseresponse: apre-eventstatewithapersistentgap∆(t)>0, asharp
convergence with ∆(t)≈0 immediately following the shock, and a post-event recovery pattern
characterized by gap re-widening, a secondary convergence, and finally sustained structural re-
covery.
13

--- Page 14 ---
contracts toward zero. This behavior reflects the rapid onset of market-wide syn-
chronization, where stock prices across sectors begin to move simultaneously.
During this period, both quantities λnorm(t) and ρ(t) increase sharply and move
max
toward each other, leading to a near-merging of the two lines across all G5 mar-
kets, resulting in the ∆(t) ≈ 0, indicating a collapse of market complexity and
structural information. In this period, the dynamics of individual stocks become
increasingly dominated by the global market mode rather than sector-specific in-
teractions. This near-merging of λnorm and ρ(t) implies that the correlation ma-
max
trix approaches an effective rank-one structure. In this period, fluctuations are
dominated by a single collective market mode, while residual structural compo-
nents, such as sectoral organization, are temporarily suppressed. This behavior
representsacollapseofmarketdimensionalityandcorrespondstoaregimewhere
diversification benefits largely disappear, as individual stock dynamics become
driven by a common global factor. The simultaneous synchronization of λnorm(t)
max
and ρ(t), with ∆(t)≈0, across all G5 markets suggests that the U.S. tariff policy
triggered a global regime shift in the stock market. This consistent cross-market
response to the tariff shock confirms that the tariff announcement functioned as
anexogenousshocktotheglobalfinancialsystem.
Beforethistariffshockinthestockmarket,wealsoobservedsimilar∆(t)≈0
patterns in individual markets corresponding to country-specific domestic shocks
in 2024. The Japan stock market exhibited ∆(t) ≈ 0 during August 2024, fol-
lowing the Bank of Japan’s unexpected policy adjustment, which disrupted carry
tradesandtriggeredasharpsell-offinJapaneseequities. Chinaexperiencedasig-
nificant volatility in October 2024, driven by a stimulus-fueled rally that abruptly
reversed due to disappointment over the lack of fiscal detail from the National
Development and Reform Commission. In each case, the λnorm, ρ(t), and ∆(t)
max
metricssuccessfullycapturedthesedomesticshockevents. Domesticshockspro-
duce ∆(t) ≈ 0 patterns that are limited to individual countries, whereas the U.S.
tariffannouncementleadstoasimultaneousconvergenceacrossallG5stockmar-
kets. This coordinated cross-market response indicates that the tariff policy acted
asaglobalexogenousshock,incontrasttocountry-specificeventsthataffectonly
local markets. The ability of the proposed RMT-based metrics to capture both
local and global disturbances highlights their usefulness for monitoring market
stabilityandidentifyingregimeshiftsatdifferentscales.
3.1.3. Post-ShockRecoveryDynamics
After the emergence of a similar event-driven pattern in λnorm(t), ρ(t), and
max
∆(t) ≈ 0 across all G5 markets in the event-driven period, the system enters a
more complex post-event period. As shown in Figs. 1(a)–1(e), the near-merging
of λnorm(t) and ρ(t) with ∆(t)≈0 is followed by a reopening of the complexity
max
14

--- Page 15 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
Figure 2: Time evolution of RMT-based complexity metrics for G5 stock markets during the
COVID-19 market shock. The red line represents the normalized largest eigenvalue λnorm(t),
max
the green line shows the average pairwise correlation ρ(t), and the shaded region between them
denotesthecomplexitygap∆(t). Acrossallmarkets,aconsistentthree-phasepatternisobserved:
a pre-event regime characterized by a persistent gap ∆(t)>0, a sharp convergence with ∆(t)≈
0 during the shock, indicating strong market-wide synchronization, and a post-event recovery
phasemarkedbygapre-widening,intermittentsecondaryconvergence,andgradualrestorationof
structuralcomplexity.
15

--- Page 16 ---
gap, resulting in ∆(t)>0 after the shock. This behavior arises from the different
decayratesofλnorm(t)andρ(t). Inthisregime,ρ(t)decreasesmorerapidlythan
max
λnorm(t),causingthecomplexitygaptowiden,i.e.,∆(t)>0. Thisre-wideningaf-
max
terthemergerofthetwometricsλnorm(t)andρ(t)suggeststhatthemarketstruc-
max
ture begins to reconstruct following the shock. As the dominant influence of the
common shock weakens, sector-specific dynamics and intra-market interactions
gradually re-emerge. After this initial widening of the gap, a second convergence
occurs in which λnorm(t) and ρ(t) move closer together, causing ∆(t) ≈ 0 once
max
more. Unlike the first event-driven convergence, which occurred at elevated lev-
els,thissecondarymergerisfollowedbyasharpdeclineinbothλnorm(t)andρ(t).
max
This pattern suggests a temporary re-synchronization of stocks as the market col-
lectivelyadjustswhileabsorbingnewinformationandresolvinguncertainty. Both
quantitiescontinuetodeclinewithmergingtolowerlevels,andthegap∆(t)grad-
ually widens again over time. This final widening of ∆(t) indicates that market
complexity has been fully restored, with stocks no longer moving uniformly and
heterogeneous responses across industries, economic sectors, and individual G5
markets becoming observable again. This similar pattern is also observed during
the COVID-19 market shock, as shown in fig. 2 and in the domestic shocks of
2024 for the Japanese market crash in August 2024 and China’s market volatil-
ity in October 2024 across all G5 markets. Despite differences in the nature and
timingoftheshock,theconvergenceofλnorm(t)andρ(t)andthesubsequentnon-
max
monotonicrecoveryof∆(t)remainqualitativelyconsistentacrossallG5markets.
This further supports the interpretation of the three-stage dynamics as a robust
structuralsignatureofcrisis-drivenmarketbehavior.
To ensure the statistical robustness of these patterns, we performed a sensi-
tivity analysis using different rolling window sizes with L=30 and L=90 days.
Inaddition,weverifiedtheresultsusingthemeanabsolutecorrelation,definedas
thearithmeticmeanoftheabsoluteoff-diagonalelementsofthecorrelationmatrix
C(t),i.e.,ρ¯(t)=⟨|C |⟩. Inallcases,theobservedthree-stagerecoverypatternre-
ij
mained consistent across markets, confirming that the identified dynamics reflect
the intrinsic market response rather than artifacts arising from parameter choices
orwindowlength.
3.2. SectoralMarket
The market-level analysis across the G5 countries reveals a consistent three-
phasecomplexityresponsetotheshock. However,thisoverallbehaviormayhide
heterogeneous dynamics present at the sectoral level. To examine this, we apply
the same RMT-based metrics λnorm(t), ρ(t), and ∆(t) within five sectors, namely
max
Information Technology (IT), Industrial, Healthcare, Consumer, and Finance of
the G5 stock market. This sector-wise analysis allows us to investigate whether
16

--- Page 17 ---
the three-phase complexity collapse and recovery pattern observed at the market
levelalsoemergeswithinindividualsectors,andwhetherdifferentsectorsexhibit
varying sensitivities to the shock. Since sectoral interactions are the underlying
source of the market-wide complexity gap, this decomposition provides a better
understanding of how sector-specific dynamics shape the aggregate market re-
sponse.
3.2.1. Sector-stockComplexityGap
Fig. 3 shows the time evolution of λnorm(t), ρ(t), and ∆(t) for the Informa-
max
tionTechnology(IT)acrosstheG5countries. Thesectoralanalysisrevealsaclear
structural difference compared to the market-level results. At the market level,
the complexity gap ∆(t) > 0, indicating that λnorm(t) consistently exceeds ρ(t)
max
throughout the period. However, at the sectoral level, this relationship is reversed
with ρ(t) exceeding λnorm(t), resulting in a negative complexity gap ∆(t) < 0.
max
This inversion in ∆(t), reflects the intrinsic homogeneity of stocks within the
same sector. Within a single sector, stocks belong to the same industry and are
subject to similar economic forces, making them inherently more correlated with
oneanotherthanstocksdrawnfromthefullmarket. Asaresult,theρ(t)withina
sectorishigher,reflectingtheunderlyinghomogeneityofintra-sectorstockmove-
ments. Thenegativegap(∆(t)<0),therefore,indicatesthat,withinasector,stock
dynamics are already largely governed by a common sectoral factor even under
normalmarketconditions.
Despite this structural difference, the three-phase response to the shock re-
mains clearly visible at the sectoral level. Before the shock, the negative gap
∆(t)<0 persists in a relatively stable manner, reflecting the baseline intra-sector
homogeneity. After the tariff shock, both λnorm(t) and ρ(t) rise sharply and con-
max
verge, with ∆(t)≈0, indicating a further loss of internal sectoral structure as all
stocks within each sector synchronize under the shock-driven market mode. In
the post-event period, the same non-monotonic recovery pattern is observed: an
initial re-widening of the gap, followed by a secondary convergence, and finally
a sustained recovery toward the pre-event baseline. This confirms that the three-
phasecomplexityresponseisnotlimitedtotheaggregatemarketlevelbutisalsoa
characteristic feature of individual sector dynamics. Similar three-phase patterns
are also observed for the Industrial, Finance, Health, and Consumer sectors, as
shown in Figs. A.5, A.6, A.7, and A.8 in Appendix Appendix A. While the
three-phasepatternisbroadlypreservedatthesectorallevel,itsstrengthandclar-
ityvaryacrosssectors. Thisvariationarisesbecausesectorsareintrinsicallymore
homogeneous systems, with higher baseline correlations and fewer independent
modes,whichcompressestheobservablestructuraltransitionandleadstoweaker
ortemporallyshiftedconvergencepatterns. Toensurerobustness,werepeatedthe
17

--- Page 18 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
Figure3:TimeevolutionofRMT-basedcomplexitymetricsforG5stockmarketsfortheITsector.
The blue line represents the normalized largest eigenvalue λnorm(t), the orange line shows the
max
raw average correlation ρ(t), and the shaded region between them denotes the complexity gap
∆(t). The vertical red dashed line marks the U.S. tariff announcement in April 2025. Across
all markets, we observe a consistent three-phase pattern: a pre-event state with a persistent gap
∆(t)<0, a sharp convergence with ∆(t)≈0 immediately following the shock, and a post-event
recoverypatterncharacterizedbygapre-widening,asecondaryconvergence,andfinallysustained
structuralrecovery.
18

--- Page 19 ---
analysis using different rolling window sizes (L=30 and L=90 days) and mean
absolute correlation, ρ(t) = ⟨|C |⟩. In all cases, the three-phase recovery pat-
ij
ternremainedconsistent,confirmingthattheobserveddynamicsarenotsensitive
to parameter choices. These findings suggest that although the sign of the com-
plexity gap, ∆(t), differs between the market and sectoral levels, the three-phase
complexity response pattern remains consistent across both scales. The sectoral
analysis,therefore,supportsthemarket-levelresultsbyshowingthatthetariffan-
nouncement not only disrupted the broad market structure but also induced the
samethree-phasereorganizationwithinindividualsectors.
For investors, these structural patterns provide a clear advantage in under-
standing post-shock market conditions. Our analysis identifies a distinct false-
recovery pattern: immediately after a shock, the complexity gap ∆(t) may tem-
porarily widen as the initial panic subsides, giving the appearance of a return to
normal conditions. However, this regime is often misleading. Our results show
that this early stabilization is followed by a secondary down-merge, in which
λnorm(t) and ρ(t) re-synchronize and the gap ∆(t) ≈ 0 merges again. There-
max
fore, investors should view the first re-emergence of ∆(t) > 0 with caution. A
premature re-entry during this phase may expose portfolios to the secondary syn-
chronization risk. The robust signal for re-entry may appear only when the gap
widens in a sustained manner, accompanied by both metrics stabilizing at lower
levels. Byrecognizingthisthree-stageprocess,investorscandistinguishfalsesig-
nals from genuine stability, avoiding the trap of premature allocation and waiting
forconfirmedstructuralrestorationbeforerebuildingriskpositions.
3.3. SectoralCollectiveModeStrength: HeatmapAnalysis
Tofurtherexaminehowshockspropagateacrosssectorsandcountries,wevi-
sualizethetemporalevolutionofsectoralcollectivedynamicsusingheatmapsfor
theG5markets. Figure4showsthemonthlyevolutionofsectoralcollectivemode
strength across the stock sectors, namely Consumer, Financial, Healthcare, Infor-
mation Technology(IT), and Industrial sectors for China, Japan, India, Germany,
and the United States. The heatmaps are constructed using the monthly average
of the normalized largest eigenvalue, λnorm(t), obtained from rolling correlation
max
matrices within each sector. This quantity measures the strength of the dominant
collective market mode. Higher values of λnorm(t) indicate stronger synchro-
max
nization among stocks within the sector and therefore stronger collective market
behavior. In the heatmaps, rows correspond to each sector and columns represent
monthly time intervals, while the color scale reflects the magnitude of collective
synchronization. Warmer colors (yellow–red) indicate stronger collective market
behavior and higher synchronization among stocks, whereas cooler colors (blue)
representweakersynchronizationandmoreheterogeneousstockmovements.
19

--- Page 20 ---
During normal market conditions, the heatmaps exhibit relatively dispersed
patterns, with moderate variations across sectors. This indicates that stock move-
mentsareinfluencedbyheterogeneoussector-specificdynamicsratherthanasin-
gle dominant market mode. From Fig. 4, we observe localized red patches corre-
sponding to country-specific domestic shocks during 2024. The Japanese market
showsapronouncedincreaseincollectivemodestrengthduringAugust2024,co-
inciding with the market disruption triggered by the Bank of Japan’s unexpected
policyadjustment. Similarly,theChinesemarketexhibitsaclearspikeinOctober
2024 associated with the volatility following the stimulus-driven rally and subse-
quentdisappointmentregardingfiscalpolicyannouncements. Theseeventsappear
in the heatmaps as temporally localized regions of strong collective synchroniza-
tion confined to the affected country, while other markets remain relatively stable
during the same period. During the period of the U.S. tariff announcement in
April 2025, a different pattern emerges. Around this period, the heatmaps for
all G5 stock markets simultaneously display large regions of elevated collective
mode strength across multiple sectors. Unlike the localized domestic shocks ob-
served earlier, this tariff event produces broad and synchronized increases in col-
lective dynamics across all countries and sectors. The simultaneous emergence
ofhigh-intensityregionsacrossgeographicallyandeconomicallydiversemarkets
indicatesaglobalsynchronizationofsectoraldynamics. Thecross-sectoralnature
of these high-intensity regions suggests that the tariff impact was not limited to
a single industry but propagated across the full market structure. Financials, IT,
Industrials,Consumer,andHealthcaresectorsacrossallcountriessimultaneously
exhibit elevated collective mode strength. This synchronized sectoral response
alignswiththeRMTresultspresentedearlier,wherethecomplexitygap∆(t)col-
lapsed across all markets, indicating a temporary loss of structural differentiation
and the dominance of a single global market mode. Together, the heatmap analy-
sis reinforces the conclusions derived from the complexity-gap dynamics. While
domestic shocks generate localized and country-specific disturbances, the U.S.
tariff announcement produces simultaneous synchronization across multiple sec-
torsandmarkets,confirmingitsroleasaglobalexogenousevent. Theconsistency
between the RMT-based metrics and the sectoral heatmap visualization provides
robust evidence that the tariff shock triggered a coordinated global restructuring
offinancialmarketdynamics.
3.4. OrdinalEntropyDuringtheTariffShock
The Complexity Gap ∆(t) captures structural changes at the spectral level. To
assess whether the observed collapse and recovery are also reflected in the direc-
tional dynamics of individual stocks, we examine the Ordinal Entropy, H (t),
ord
which measures the diversity of three-day ordinal patterns across all stocks. A
20

--- Page 21 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
Figure 4: Monthly evolution of sectoral collective mode strength measured by the normalized
largest eigenvalue λnorm(t) across five sectors and five G5 markets. Warmer colors indicate
max
stronger synchronization. The U.S. tariff announcement in April 2025 triggers a simultaneous,
cross-sectoral surge in collective dynamics across all markets, confirming its nature as a global
exogenousshock,incontrasttothelocalizedresponsesobservedduringthe2024domesticevents
inJapanandChina.
21

--- Page 22 ---
valuenearlog6≈1.79natsindicatesarichmixtureofdirectionalreturnpatterns,
whereas a sharp decline suggests that most stocks follow a common trajectory.
We define four analysis windows to isolate the market response. The pre-shock
reference period spans January 2 to March 31, 2025, representing three months
of relatively stable conditions prior to the tariff announcement. The shock win-
dow is defined as April 7–11, 2025, corresponding to ±2 trading days around
the announcement. The false recovery phase extends from April 14 until the last
daybeforeH (t)remainscontinuouslyabove1.0natsforatleast20consecutive
ord
trading days. The stabilized period is defined as June 16–July 15, 2025. Table 1
presentsthemeanentropyforthepre-shockandstabilizedintervals,themeanover
theshockwindow,andthe95thpercentileobservedduringtherecoveryphase.
Table1:OrdinalentropystatisticsacrossG5marketsaroundthe2025U.S.tariffshock.Pre-shock
and post-shock values are means ± standard deviation over the indicated intervals. The shock
window is April 7–11, 2025 (±2 trading days). The false recovery 95th percentile (95th %ile)
is taken over the false recovery phase. Entropy values are in nats. The sharp drop during the
shockwindowandthesubsequentfalserecoveryconfirmthethree-phasepatternobservedinthe
ComplexityGap.
Country Pre-ShockMean ShockWindowMean FalseRecovery Post-ShockMean
95th%ile
UnitedStates 1.50±0.12 0.89±0.21 1.72 1.60±0.08
China 1.53±0.14 1.10±0.48 1.67 1.62±0.09
Japan 1.48±0.11 0.64±0.29 1.68 1.55±0.10
India 1.49±0.13 0.95±0.19 1.63 1.58±0.08
Germany 1.47±0.10 0.86±0.17 1.74 1.55±0.09
Table 1 represents the mean H (t) across the four analysis windows. Before
ord
the shock, H averages between 1.47 and 1.53 nats across all five markets, es-
ord
tablishingabaselineofhealthydirectionaldiversity. DuringtheApril7-11shock
window, this diversity collapses sharply, to 0.64 nats in Japan and 0.86 nats in
Germany, as stocks synchronize onto a narrow set of ordinal sequences. China’s
shock-window average is higher (1.10±0.48 nats), as the initial drop was fol-
lowed by a rapid rebound within the same week. This may reflect the fact that
ChineseequitieswerealreadyunderpressurefromongoingU.S.–Chinatradeten-
sions and domestic policy adjustments, potentially reducing the incremental im-
pact of the tariff announcement. In the false recovery phase, entropy rebounds
to a 95th percentile of 1.63-1.74 nats, approaching pre-shock levels. However,
thisrecoveryisshort-lived: intheUnitedStates,entropysubsequentlydipsbelow
1.0 nats, while Japan, India, and Germany exhibit notable secondary declines of
0.2 to 0.4 nats before finally stabilizing. China is the exception; after its rapid
22

--- Page 23 ---
spike, entropy remains elevated without a secondary collapse. By the stabilized
period, H settles between 1.55 and 1.65 nats across all markets, with standard
ord
deviations notably smaller than before the shock, indicating a new, more tightly
bounded equilibrium of directional behavior. The three-phase pattern in H (t)
ord
mirrors the dynamics of the Complexity Gap ∆(t), confirming that the structural
collapse,falserecovery,andstabilizationobservedatthespectrallevelareaccom-
panied by a corresponding loss and temporary restoration of directional diversity.
This convergent evidence reinforces the interpretation of the tariff announcement
asagenuine,multi-facetedshocktoglobalequitymarkets.
3.5. PortfolioRiskandtheComplexityGap
To examine whether the complexity gap ∆ contains information about future
portfolio risk, we perform a large-scale portfolio simulation across the G5 mar-
kets over the period January to December 2025. This sample period covers three
distinct periods: a pre-event period, the tariff shock in April 2025, and the sub-
sequent post-event recovery period. Our approach uses a rolling window design,
with 60-day estimation periods followed by 20-day out-of-sample test windows.
Ateachstep,werandomlyselected500portfolios,eachcontaining10stocks. For
every portfolio, we calculated the complexity gap ∆(t) = λnorm(t)−ρ(t) using
max
data from the estimation window. During each rolling step, we constructed two
types of portfolios using the estimation window: minimum-variance portfolios
(MVP), based on the estimated covariance matrix, and simple equal-weight port-
folios(EW),whichserveasanaivebenchmark. Theseportfolioweightswerethen
applied to the subsequent test window, where portfolio risk was measured as the
annualizedvolatilityofreturns. Forcomparison,wealsocomputedtwotraditional
predictors from the estimation window: the average correlation ρ and the histor-
ical equal-weight volatility σ . In total, our analysis includes 416,500 portfolio
hist
observations. Toevaluatetherelationshipbetween∆andfutureportfoliorisk,we
employ three complementary approaches: Spearman rank correlations between ∆
andrealizedMVPvolatility,incrementalR2 measuresthatquantifytheadditional
explanatory power of ∆ beyond each benchmark predictor, and a quintile analy-
sis in which portfolios are sorted into five groups based on ∆ to examine whether
highercomplexityissystematicallyassociatedwithlowerrealizedvolatility.
Table 2 presents the relationship between the complexity gap (∆) and future
portfolio volatility. The Spearman correlations between ∆ and MVP realized
volatility are negative and statistically significant across all G5 stock markets,
ranging from -0.144 to -0.235. This indicates that lower levels of complexity
are associated with higher subsequent portfolio risk. The quintile analysis rein-
forces this finding in all G5 stock markets. Average portfolio volatility declines
monotonically as we move from the lowest ∆ group (Q0) to the highest ∆ group
23

--- Page 24 ---
Table2:ThistablereportsSpearmanrankcorrelationsbetweenthecomplexitygap(∆)andout-of-
sample portfolio volatility for both minimum-variance portfolios (MVP) and equal-weight port-
folios(EW).ItalsopresentsannualizedMVPvolatilityacross∆quintiles. Thelong–short(L/S)
spreadisdefinedasthedifferenceinvolatilitybetweenthehighestandlowest∆quintiles(Q4−
Q0). Allvolatilitiesareannualized(%). Intotal,theanalysisincludes416,500portfolioobserva-
tions.
SpearmanCorr. L/S MVPVolatilityby∆Quintile(%)
Country ρ(∆,σ ) ρ(∆,σ ) Spread(%) Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
MVP EW
US −0.176∗∗∗ −0.046∗∗∗ −2.033 16.98 16.28 15.73 15.43 14.95
China −0.150∗∗∗ +0.191∗∗∗ −1.701 13.33 12.78 12.32 11.81 11.63
India −0.160∗∗∗ −0.074∗∗∗ −2.210 14.85 14.36 13.83 13.36 12.64
Japan −0.235∗∗∗ +0.077∗∗∗ −4.465 20.18 17.86 16.96 16.26 15.71
Germany −0.144∗∗∗ −0.035∗∗∗ −2.056 17.54 16.55 15.94 15.85 15.49
∗∗∗p<0.001. Q0: lowest∆(complexitycollapse);Q4: highest∆(structuraldiversity).
(Q4). Here, Q0 represents the set of portfolios with the lowest values of the com-
plexity gap, corresponding to periods when λnorm(t) and ρ(t) converge during
max
market stress. In contrast, Q4 represents portfolios with the highest complexity
gap, reflecting periods of normal market conditions with well-developed struc-
tural diversity. The annualized volatility difference between the extreme quin-
tiles is reaching up to 4.47 percent in Japan. The correlations between ∆ and
equal-weight portfolio volatility vary in both sign and magnitude across markets,
indicating that the predictive content of ∆ arises primarily from the correlation
structure rather than broad market movements. Table 3 reports results for bench-
markpredictorsandtheadditionalcontributionofthecomplexitygap∆. Average
correlation and historical volatility show a positive association with future MVP
volatility, reflecting persistence in market risk. In contrast, ∆ exhibits a negative
relationship, indicating that it captures a distinct structural feature of market dy-
namics. The incremental R2 results show that ∆ adds modest explanatory power
beyond these benchmarks, suggesting that it does not operate as a purely linear
predictor but varies across market conditions. During the pre-shock period, the
relationship between ∆ and future volatility is weak in most markets. Follow-
ing the tariff shock, however, the relationship turns strongly negative across all
markets, with correlations ranging from -0.141 to -0.239. This indicates that ∆
becomesinformativeduringperiodsofmarketstress,whentheunderlyingmarket
structure breaks down. During stable periods, when the complexity gap remains
steady,itspredictivepowerislimited.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Table3: ThetablereportsSpearmanrankcorrelationsbetweenbenchmarkpredictors,namelyav-
eragecorrelation(ρ)andhistoricalequal-weightvolatility(σ ),andout-of-sampleMVPvolatility.
h
ItalsoreportstheincrementalR2 obtainedbyaddingthecomplexitygap(∆)toeachbenchmark
predictor. Inaddition, itpresentstheSpearmancorrelationbetween∆andMVPvolatilityinthe
pre-shockandpost-shockperiodssurroundingtheApril2025tariffevent.
BenchmarkSpearman Incr.R2of∆ SubperiodSpearman
Country ρ(ρ,σ ) ρ(σ ,σ ) overρ overσ Pre-shock Post-shock
MVP h MVP h
US +0.522 +0.578 +0.0008 +0.0000 +0.045 −0.206
China +0.145 +0.079 +0.0043 +0.0118 +0.041 −0.141
India +0.443 +0.555 +0.0033 +0.0054 −0.072 −0.150
Japan +0.285 +0.333 +0.0037 +0.0055 +0.001 −0.239
Germany +0.285 +0.334 +0.0024 +0.0028 +0.018 −0.158
4. Conclusion
In this study, we introduced the complexity gap ∆(t), derived from RMT, to
uncoveraconsistentandeconomicallymeaningfulstructuralpatterninstockmar-
kets during exogenous shock events. We analyze both market-level and sector-
level stock dynamics across the G5 economies, namely the United States, China,
Germany, India, and Japan, covering shock events, the U.S. tariff announcement
of 2025, and the COVID-19 crisis. Using a rolling-window RMT framework, we
definethecomplexitygapasthedifferencebetweenthenormalizedlargesteigen-
value,λnorm(t),andtheaveragecorrelation,ρ(t). Thismeasurecaptureswhether
max
market dynamics are dominated by a single common factor or by multiple inter-
actingcomponents.
AcrossalltheG5stockmarkets,weobserveaconsistentthree-phasestructural
pattern at both the market and sector levels during these exogenous shock events.
Before the shock events, markets exhibit a positive complexity gap ∆(t)>0, in-
dicating a well-developed internal structure with sector-specific dynamics oper-
ating alongside the common market mode. However, during the shock periods,
this structure collapses across all G5 markets, as both λnorm(t) and ρ(t) increase
max
sharply and converge, leading to a rapid contraction of the complexity gap to-
ward zero, ∆(t)≈0. This reflects a state of strong market-wide synchronization
in which stock dynamics become dominated by a single global factor, resulting
in a loss of structural diversity and an effective reduction in the informational
content of the correlation matrix. In this regime, sector-specific and idiosyncratic
interactions are suppressed, and market behavior is largely governed by a single
collectivemode. Inthepost-shockregime,weobserveanon-monotonicrecovery
patterncharacterizedbyaninitialre-wideningofthecomplexitygap,followedby
a secondary convergence during which both λnorm(t) and ρ(t) decline simulta-
max
25

--- Page 26 ---
neously and move closer together, leading to a renewed contraction of ∆(t)≈0.
Finally, the gap widens again in a sustained manner, restoring ∆(t) > 0. This
three-stage recovery reveals intermediate false recovery phases, where the com-
plexitygapinitiallywidensaftertheshock,givingtheappearanceofstabilization,
butthemarketbecomessynchronizedagainbrieflybeforefullyrecovering. Atthe
sectorallevel,weobserveastructurallydistinctbehaviorinwhichthecomplexity
gap is negative, ∆(t) < 0, reflecting the inherent homogeneity and stronger cor-
relations within individual sectors. Despite this inversion, the same three-phase
structural pattern persists across sectors, demonstrating that the collapse and re-
covery of market structure is a robust phenomenon operating across both market
and sector levels. The same three-phase pattern is observed across both global
and country-specific shocks, including the U.S. tariff event, the COVID-19 cri-
sis, and localized shocks in Japan and China, highlighting the robustness of the
complexitygapincapturingstructuralchangesacrossdifferenttypesofshocks.
TheheatmapanalysisconfirmsthattheU.S.tariffeventactsasaglobalshock,
producingsimultaneoussynchronizationacrossallG5marketsandsectors,whereas
domesticshocksremainlocalizedwithinindividualcountries. Thisfindingestab-
lishes that the 2025 tariff announcement fundamentally altered the global stock
market structure, inducing a coordinated regime shift across geographically and
economically diverse markets. Ordinal entropy analysis of cross-sectional re-
turn patterns further corroborates these results, revealing a parallel collapse and
false restoration of directional diversity that aligns closely with the three-phase
complexity gap dynamics. We also analyze portfolio risk using the complexity
gap. We find that lower values of ∆(t) are associated with higher future portfo-
lio volatility, while higher values correspond to more stable market conditions.
This indicates that the complexity gap provides useful information about portfo-
lio risk, particularly during periods of market stress. Overall, our results show
that the complexity gap can be used to characterize structural dynamics in stock
markets. By linking correlation structure, eigenvalue dynamics, and collective
synchronization, this framework provides a unified view of how markets respond
tobothglobalandlocalshocks. Theconsistentemergenceofthethree-phasepat-
ternacrosscountries,sectors,anddifferentshockeventssuggeststhatitrepresents
afundamentalstructuralsignatureoffinancialsystemsunderstress.
For investors, recognizing the false-recovery signal embedded in the initial
post-shockgapwideningmayhelpavoidprematurere-entryduringperiodswhen
market structure remains fragile. The sustained re-widening of ∆, accompanied
by stabilization of both spectral measures at lower levels, appears to be a more
reliableindicatorofgenuinestructuralrecovery.
26

--- Page 27 ---
AppendixA. Complexity Gap During the Tariff 2025 Shock: Sector-level
Analysis
27

--- Page 28 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
Figure A.5: Time evolution of RMT-based complexity metrics for G5 stock markets for the In-
dustrialssector. Theredlinerepresentsthenormalizedlargesteigenvalueλnorm(t),thegreenline
max
shows the raw average correlation ρ(t), and the shaded region between them denotes the com-
plexitygap∆(t). TheverticalreddashedlinemarkstheU.S.tariffannouncementinApril2025.
Acrossallmarkets,weobserveaconsistentthree-phasepattern: apre-eventstatewithapersistent
gap ∆(t)<0, a sharp convergence with ∆(t)≈0 immediately following the shock, and a post-
event recovery pattern characterized by gap re-widening, a secondary convergence, and finally
sustainedstructuralrecovery.
28

--- Page 29 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
FigureA.6:TimeevolutionofRMT-basedcomplexitymetricsforG5stockmarketsfortheFinan-
cialsector.Theredlinerepresentsthenormalizedlargesteigenvalueλnorm(t),thegreenlineshows
max
therawaveragecorrelationρ(t),andtheshadedregionbetweenthemdenotesthecomplexitygap
∆(t). The vertical red dashed line marks the U.S. tariff announcement in April 2025. Across
all markets, we observe a consistent three-phase pattern: a pre-event state with a persistent gap
∆(t)<0, a sharp convergence with ∆(t)≈0 immediately following the shock, and a post-event
recoverypatterncharacterizedbygapre-widening,asecondaryconvergence,andfinallysustained
structuralrecovery.
29

--- Page 30 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
FigureA.7:TimeevolutionofRMT-basedcomplexitymetricsforG5stockmarketsfortheHealth
sector. The red line represents the normalized largest eigenvalue λnorm(t), the green line shows
max
the raw average correlation ρ(t), and the shaded region between them denotes the complexity
gap∆(t). TheverticalreddashedlinemarkstheU.S.tariffannouncementinApril2025. Across
all markets, we observe a consistent three-phase pattern: a pre-event state with a persistent gap
∆(t)<0, a sharp convergence with ∆(t)≈0 immediately following the shock, and a post-event
recoverypatterncharacterizedbygapre-widening,asecondaryconvergence,andfinallysustained
structuralrecovery.
30

--- Page 31 ---
(a) China (b) Japan
(c) India (d) Germany
(e) UnitedStates
FigureA.8: TimeevolutionofRMT-basedcomplexitymetricsforG5stockmarketsfortheCon-
sumer sector. The red line represents the normalized largest eigenvalue λnorm(t), the green line
max
shows the raw average correlation ρ(t), and the shaded region between them denotes the com-
plexitygap∆(t). TheverticalreddashedlinemarkstheU.S.tariffannouncementinApril2025.
Across all markets, we observe a consistent three-phase response: a pre-event state with a per-
sistentgap∆(t)<0, asharpconvergencewith∆(t)≈0immediatelyfollowingtheshock, anda
post-event recovery pattern characterized by gap re-widening, a secondary convergence, and fi-
nallysustainedstructuralrecovery.
31

--- Page 32 ---
AppendixB. ListofStockTickers
Table B.4: Stock tickers across five sectors and five countries analyzed in this
study. Thesamplecomprises125listedequitiesspanningtheFinance,Industrials,
Consumer Discretionary, Information Technology, and Healthcare sectors drawn
from the United States, India, Japan, China, and Germany, sourced from Yahoo
Finance,andcoveringmajorbenchmarkindicesineachmarket.
S.No. Sector US India Japan China Germany
1 Finance JPM HDFCBANK.NS 8306.T 601398.SS ALV.DE
2 Finance V ICICIBANK.NS 8316.T 601288.SS DBK.DE
3 Finance MA SBIN.NS 8411.T 601939.SS MUV2.DE
4 Finance BAC LICI.NS 8766.T 601988.SS DB1.DE
5 Finance WFC AXISBANK.NS 8750.T 601318.SS HNR1.DE
6 Finance BRK-B KOTAKBANK.NS 8604.T 600036.SS CBK.DE
7 Finance GS BAJFINANCE.NS 7182.T 601628.SS TLX.DE
8 Finance MS BAJAJFINSV.NS 6178.T 601166.SS DWS.DE
9 Finance AXP INDUSINDBK.NS 8725.T 600030.SS GLJ.DE
10 Finance C JIOFIN.NS 8630.T 601658.SS HYQ.DE
11 Finance BLK PNB.NS 8308.T 601328.SS WUW.DE
12 Finance SPGI BANKBARODA.NS 8591.T 600000.SS PBB.DE
13 Finance SCHW CHOLAFIN.NS 8309.T 601601.SS MLP.DE
14 Finance PGR SHRIRAMFIN.NS 8473.T 601688.SS ARL.DE
15 Finance CB HDFCLIFE.NS 7186.T 600919.SS DBAN.DE
16 Finance CME SBILIFE.NS 8331.T 000001.SZ FTK.DE
17 Finance ICE MUTHOOTFIN.NS 8354.T 600016.SS BNP.DE
18 Finance MMC CANBK.NS 5831.T 601998.SS PAT.DE
19 Finance MCO PFC.NS 8795.T 600958.SS G24.DE
20 Finance COF RECLTD.NS 8593.T 600837.SS LEG.DE
21 Finance AON UNIONBANK.NS 8304.T 000166.SZ OLB.DE
22 Finance MET IRFC.NS 8303.T 000776.SZ PCZ.DE
23 Finance PRU IDFCFIRSTB.NS 8253.T 601211.SS LUS.DE
24 Finance TRV YESBANK.NS 8410.T 601881.SS XTP.DE
25 Finance IBKR ICICIPRULI.NS 5838.T 002142.SZ VNA.DE
26 Industrials GE LT.NS 6861.T 300750.SZ SIE.DE
27 Industrials CAT ADANIPORTS.NS 8058.T 601800.SS DHL.DE
28 Industrials RTX HAL.NS 8001.T 600031.SS AIR.DE
29 Industrials GEV ADANIENT.NS 8031.T 601668.SS SND.DE
32

--- Page 33 ---
TableB.4
S.No. Sector US India Japan China Germany
30 Industrials BA EICHERMOT.NS 6954.T 601919.SS SDF.DE
31 Industrials HON INDIGO.NS 6273.T 601766.SS SZG.DE
32 Industrials LMT TATAMOTORS.NS 6301.T 601390.SS DTG.DE
33 Industrials DE ABB.NS 9022.T 600893.SS RHM.DE
34 Industrials UNP ASHOKLEY.NS 9020.T 000338.SZ MTX.DE
35 Industrials ETN CUMMINSIND.NS 6367.T 002475.SZ BNR.DE
36 Industrials PH SIEMENS.NS 6594.T 601989.SS G1A.DE
37 Industrials NOC POLYCAB.NS 6326.T 000157.SZ KGX.DE
38 Industrials GD MAZDOCK.NS 7011.T 000425.SZ TKA.DE
39 Industrials TT GMRAIRPORT.NS 8002.T 600089.SS FRA.DE
40 Industrials UPS CGPOWER.NS 8053.T 600406.SS LHA.DE
41 Industrials WM BHEL.NS 6201.T 300014.SZ HLAG.DE
42 Industrials EMR POWERINDIA.NS 6506.T 688599.SS HEI.DE
43 Industrials HWM GVT&D.NS 6501.T 300274.SZ RAA.DE
44 Industrials MMM HAVELLS.NS 9202.T 002459.SZ JUN3.DE
45 Industrials CMI WAAREEENER.NS 9201.T 601012.SS DUE.DE
46 Industrials TDG BEL.NS 9101.T 601111.SS KRN.DE
47 Industrials ITW ASTRAL.NS 9104.T 600029.SS GBF.DE
48 Industrials CTAS KEI.NS 9107.T 002352.SZ HOT.DE
49 Industrials FDX CONCOR.NS 1802.T 688187.SS NDA.DE
50 Industrials VRT BHARATFORG.NS 1812.T 601006.SS DEZ.DE
51 Consumer AMZN MARUTI.NS 7203.T 000333.SZ MBG.DE
52 Consumer TSLA M&M.NS 6758.T 002594.SZ BMW.DE
53 Consumer HD TITAN.NS 7267.T 000651.SZ VOW3.DE
54 Consumer MCD DMART.NS 7974.T 600104.SS P911.DE
55 Consumer LOW BAJAJ-AUTO.NS 9983.T 600690.SS ADS.DE
56 Consumer NKE TVSMOTOR.NS 6902.T 601888.SS CON.DE
57 Consumer SBUX JUBLFOOD.NS 4661.T 601127.SS PUM.DE
58 Consumer TJX TRENT.NS 5108.T 600660.SS DHER.DE
59 Consumer BKNG HEROMOTOCO.NS 7269.T 601633.SS ZAL.DE
60 Consumer ABNB ASIANPAINT.NS 6752.T 000625.SZ HFG.DE
61 Consumer CMG INDHOTEL.NS 7201.T 600741.SS BOSS.DE
62 Consumer F MOTHERSON.NS 4755.T 002027.SZ TUI1.DE
63 Consumer GM ZOMATO.NS 7202.T 300144.SZ EVD.DE
64 Consumer MAR SWIGGY.NS 7272.T 603515.SS HBM.DE
65 Consumer LULU PAGEIND.NS 7832.T 603486.SS FIE.DE
66 Consumer HLT BERGEPAINT.NS 4911.T 000921.SZ SIX2.DE
33

--- Page 34 ---
TableB.4
S.No. Sector US India Japan China Germany
67 Consumer ROST KALYANKJIL.NS 9843.T 002032.SZ HBH.DE
68 Consumer AZO APOLLOTYRE.NS 7270.T 002508.SZ ZOO.DE
69 Consumer RCL BALKRISIND.NS 7261.T 601058.SS CEC.DE
70 Consumer LEN DLF.NS 3099.T 601021.SS B4B.DE
71 Consumer TGT METROBRAND.NS 7532.T 603885.SS PAH3.DE
72 Consumer DHI NYKAA.NS 7453.T 300413.SZ HLE.DE
73 Consumer EBAY MANYAVAR.NS 7731.T 002739.SZ TRG.DE
74 Consumer ULTA VEDANT.NS 6952.T 600177.SS VIB3.DE
75 Consumer TPR SHOPERSTOP.NS 5802.T 600754.SS ST5.DE
76 IT NVDA TCS.NS 8035.T 688981.SS SAP.DE
77 IT MSFT INFY.NS 6857.T 603501.SS IFX.DE
78 IT AAPL HCLTECH.NS 9984.T 601138.SS SHL.DE
79 IT GOOGL WIPRO.NS 6971.T 002415.SZ TMV.DE
80 IT AVGO LTIM.NS 6981.T 000063.SZ NEM.DE
81 IT ORCL TECHM.NS 6723.T 002230.SZ BC8.DE
82 IT CRM OFSS.NS 6703.T 002371.SZ COK.DE
83 IT AMD PERSISTENT.NS 6920.T 002049.SZ SOW.DE
84 IT ADBE LTTS.NS 6146.T 603986.SS AIXA.DE
85 IT IBM MPHASIS.NS 6702.T 300782.SZ WAF.DE
86 IT CSCO COFORGE.NS 6701.T 000977.SZ UTDI.DE
87 IT TXN KPITTECH.NS 6963.T 688012.SS 1U1.DE
88 IT INTC TATAELXSI.NS 6762.T 600584.SS AOF.DE
89 IT NOW NAUKRI.NS 7735.T 600745.SS JEN.DE
90 IT AMAT CYIENT.NS 9613.T 300661.SZ COP.DE
91 IT QCOM ZENSARTECH.NS 4307.T 603019.SS GFT.DE
92 IT LRCX SONATSOFTW.NS 4704.T 600570.SS SANT.DE
93 IT PANW HAPPISTMND.NS 4684.T 688256.SS NA9.DE
94 IT ANET INTELLECT.NS 9719.T 688126.SS YSN.DE
95 IT MU AFFLE.NS 4739.T 300124.SZ ADN1.DE
96 IT SNOW NEWGEN.NS 6645.T 002241.SZ SMHN.DE
97 IT CRWD TANLA.NS 6965.T 000725.SZ PFV.DE
98 IT SNPS LATENTVIEW.NS 6976.T 000100.SZ ELG.DE
99 IT CDNS RATEGAIN.NS 4062.T 600703.SS BSL.DE
100 IT PLTR MAPMYINDIA.NS 3436.T 688008.SS LPK.DE
101 Healthcare LLY SUNPHARMA.NS 4502.T 600276.SS BAYN.DE
102 Healthcare UNH DIVISLAB.NS 4503.T 300760.SZ MRK.DE
103 Healthcare JNJ CIPLA.NS 4568.T 603259.SS SHL.DE
34

--- Page 35 ---
TableB.4
S.No. Sector US India Japan China Germany
104 Healthcare MRK DRREDDY.NS 4543.T 600436.SS FRE.DE
105 Healthcare ABBV APOLLOHOSP.NS 4519.T 000538.SZ FME.DE
106 Healthcare TMO TORNTPHARM.NS 7733.T 300015.SZ SRT3.DE
107 Healthcare ABT MANKIND.NS 6869.T 300122.SZ QIA.DE
108 Healthcare DHR ZYDUSLIFE.NS 4523.T 000661.SZ 22UA.DE
109 Healthcare AMGN MAXHEALTH.NS 4507.T 300142.SZ AFX.DE
110 Healthcare PFE LUPIN.NS 4578.T 600196.SS BEI.DE
111 Healthcare ISRG AUROPHARMA.NS 2413.T 000963.SZ EVT.DE
112 Healthcare SYK ALKEM.NS 4151.T 002422.SZ GXI.DE
113 Healthcare MDT ABBOTT.NS 4528.T 600332.SS COP.DE
114 Healthcare ELV BIOCON.NS 4536.T 600998.SS MOR.DE
115 Healthcare GILD GLENMARK.NS 4508.T 300003.SZ EUZ.DE
116 Healthcare BSX SYNGENE.NS 4581.T 002044.SZ DMP.DE
117 Healthcare VRTX FORTIS.NS 4530.T 002007.SZ SAE.DE
118 Healthcare REGN GSK.NS 4527.T 002030.SZ DRW3.DE
119 Healthcare ZTS IPCALAB.NS 4506.T 002603.SZ MEDP.DE
120 Healthcare HCA MEDANTA.NS 6849.T 688363.SS NXU.DE
121 Healthcare BDX NH.NS 4544.T 600763.SS SBS.DE
122 Healthcare HUM LAURUSLABS.NS 4887.T 300759.SZ FYB.DE
123 Healthcare MRNA NATCOPHARM.NS 4516.T 603658.SS SYAB.DE
124 Healthcare EW ASTERDM.NS 4587.T 002821.SZ PHH2.DE
125 Healthcare DXCM GRANULES.NS 7747.T 600085.SS BIO3.DE
References
[1] R. N. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, Introduction to econophysics: correlations
andcomplexityinfinance,Cambridgeuniversitypress,1999.
[2] J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Potters, Theory of financial risk and derivative pricing:
from statistical physics to risk management, Cambridge university press,
2003.
[3] R. N. Mantegna, Hierarchical structure in financial markets, The European
Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 11 (1) (1999)
193–197.
[4] D. Sornette, Why stock markets crash: critical events in complex financial
systems,Princetonuniversitypress,2017.
35

--- Page 36 ---
[5] K.Mukhia,B.N.Sharma,S.R.Luwang,M.Nurujjaman,C.Hens,S.Saha,
T.Chakraborty,Early-warningsignalsofpoliticalriskinstablecoinmarkets:
Humanandalgorithmicbehavioraroundthe2024uselection,arXivpreprint
arXiv:2512.00893(2025).
[6] J.-P. Onnela, A. Chakraborti, K. Kaski, J. Kertesz, A. Kanto, Dynamics of
market correlations: Taxonomy and portfolio analysis, Physical Review E
68(5)(2003)056110.
[7] M. Tumminello, T. Aste, T. Di Matteo, R. N. Mantegna, A tool for filtering
information in complex systems, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences102(30)(2005)10421–10426.
[8] I. Ansari, C. Sharma, A. Agrawal, N. Sahni, A novel portfolio construc-
tionstrategybasedonthecore-peripheryprofileofstocks,ScientificReports
15(1)(2025)36882.
[9] M. Billio, M. Getmansky, A. W. Lo, L. Pelizzon, Econometric measures of
connectednessandsystemicriskinthefinanceandinsurancesectors,Journal
offinancialeconomics104(3)(2012)535–559.
[10] P. Pawanesh, I. Ansari, N. Sahni, Exploring the core–periphery and com-
munity structure in the financial networks through random matrix theory,
PhysicaA:StatisticalMechanicsanditsApplications661(2025)130403.
[11] G. Bonanno, G. Caldarelli, F. Lillo, R. N. Mantegna, Topology of
correlation-based minimal spanning trees in real and model markets, Physi-
calReviewE68(4)(2003)046130.
[12] C.Sharma,K.Banerjee,Astudyofcorrelationsinthestockmarket,Physica
A:StatisticalMechanicsandItsApplications432(2015)321–330.
[13] L. S. Junior, I. D. P. Franca, Correlation of financial markets in times of
crisis,PhysicaA:StatisticalMechanicsanditsApplications391(1-2)(2012)
187–208.
[14] D.-M. Song, M. Tumminello, W.-X. Zhou, R. N. Mantegna, Evolution
of worldwide stock markets, correlation structure, and correlation-based
graphs, Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics
84(2)(2011)026108.
36

--- Page 37 ---
[15] K. Mukhia, A. Rai, S. Luwang, M. Nurujjaman, S. Majhi, C. Hens, Com-
plex network analysis of cryptocurrency market during crashes, Physica A:
StatisticalMechanicsanditsApplications653(2024)130095.
[16] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B. Rosenow, L. A. N. Amaral, T. Guhr, H. E.
Stanley, Random matrix approach to cross correlations in financial data,
PhysicalReviewE65(6)(2002)066126.
[17] Y. Malevergne, D. Sornette, Collective origin of the coexistence of apparent
randommatrixtheorynoiseandoffactorsinlargesamplecorrelationmatri-
ces, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 331 (3-4) (2004)
660–668.
[18] D.Y.Kenett,M.Tumminello,A.Madi,G.Gur-Gershgoren,R.N.Mantegna,
E. Ben-Jacob, Dominating clasp of the financial sector revealed by partial
correlationanalysisofthestockmarket,PloSone5(12)(2010)e15032.
[19] T.Preis,J.J.Schneider,H.E.Stanley,Switchingprocessesinfinancialmar-
kets, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (19) (2011)
7674–7678.
[20] J.-P.Bouchaud,Radicalcomplexity,Entropy23(12)(2021)1676.
[21] H.K.Pharasi,K.Sharma,A.Chakraborti,T.H.Seligman,Complexmarket
dynamics in the light of random matrix theory, in: New perspectives and
challengesineconophysicsandsociophysics,Springer,2019,pp.13–34.
[22] R. K. Pan, S. Sinha, Collective behavior of stock price movements in an
emerging market, Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Mat-
terPhysics76(4)(2007)046116.
[23] L.Laloux,P.Cizeau,J.-P.Bouchaud,M.Potters,Noisedressingoffinancial
correlationmatrices,Physicalreviewletters83(7)(1999)1467.
[24] B.Rosenow,V.Plerou,P.Gopikrishnan,L.A.N.Amaral,H.E.Stanley,Ap-
plicationofrandommatrixtheorytostudycross-correlationsofstockprices,
InternationalJournalofTheoreticalandAppliedFinance3(03)(2000)399–
403.
[25] K.Mukhia,I.Ansari,S.Luwang,M.Nurujjaman,Core-peripherydynamics
inmarket-conditionedfinancial networks: Aconditionalp-threshold mutual
informationapproach,arXivpreprintarXiv:2601.00395(2026).
37

--- Page 38 ---
[26] Y. Tang, J. Xiong, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhuang, K. Li, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, Looking
into the market behaviors through the lens of correlations and eigenvalues:
An investigation on the chinese and us markets using rmt, Entropy 25 (10)
(2023)1460.
[27] M. Potters, J.-P. Bouchaud, L. Laloux, Financial applications of random
matrix theory: Old laces and new pieces, arXiv preprint physics/0507111
(2005).
[28] M.L.Mehta,Randommatrices,Vol.142,Elsevier,2004.
[29] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B. Rosenow, L. A. N. Amaral, H. E. Stanley,
Universal and nonuniversal properties of cross correlations in financial time
series,Physicalreviewletters83(7)(1999)1471.
[30] Z. Zheng, B. Podobnik, L. Feng, B. Li, Changes in cross-correlations as an
indicatorforsystemicrisk,Scientificreports2(1)(2012)888.
[31] D.Y.Kenett,Y.Shapira,A.Madi,S.Bransburg-Zabary,G.Gur-Gershgoren,
E. Ben-Jacob, Dynamics of stock market correlations., AUCO Czech Eco-
nomicReview4(3)(2010).
[32] L. Sandoval Jr, Structure of a global network of financial companies based
ontransferentropy,Entropy16(8)(2014)4443–4482.
[33] A. Domínguez-Monterroza, A. Jiménez-Martín, A. Mateos-Caballero, Cor-
relationstructureofthespanishstockmarketaroundcovid-19usingrandom
matrixtheory,ComputationalEconomics66(6)(2025)4543–4558.
[34] D.Y.Kenett,T.Preis,G.Gur-Gershgoren,E.Ben-Jacob,Quantifyingmeta-
correlationsinfinancialmarkets,EurophysicsLetters99(3)(2012)38001.
[35] L. Molero González, R. Cerqueti, R. Mattera, J. E. Trinidad Segovia, The
random matrix-based informative content of correlation matrices in stock
markets, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 35 (9)
(2025).
[36] S. Nayak, B. B. Misra, H. S. Behera, Impact of data normalization on stock
index forecasting, International Journal of Computer Information Systems
andIndustrialManagementApplications6(2014)13–13.
[37] S. Bhanja, A. Das, Impact of data normalization on deep neural network for
timeseriesforecasting,arXivpreprintarXiv:1812.05519(2018).
38

--- Page 39 ---
[38] C. Bandt, B. Pompe, Permutation entropy: A natural complexity mea-
sure for time series, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 174102. doi:10.1103/
PhysRevLett.88.174102.
URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.174102
[39] H. Markowitz, Modern portfolio theory, Journal of Finance 7 (11) (1952)
77–91.
[40] S.Maillard,T.Roncalli,J.Teïletche,Thepropertiesofequallyweightedrisk
contributionportfolios,Journalofportfoliomanagement36(4)(2010)60.
[41] J.B.Detemple,R.Garcia,M.Rindisbacher,Amontecarlomethodforopti-
malportfolios,ThejournalofFinance58(1)(2003)401–446.
[42] R. O. Michaud, R. Michaud, Estimation error and portfolio optimization: a
resamplingsolution,AvailableatSSRN2658657(2007).
[43] Yahoofinance,https://finance.yahoo.com/,accessed: 2026.
39